In the year 1858, the French novelist
Gustave Flaubert arrived in North Africa
hoping to find inspiration for his
latest book.
Flaubert was a seasoned traveler, and a
decade or so earlier had embarked on a
grand tour of Cairo, Constantinople,
Greece, and Italy.
But the writer, who now departed on this
new set of travels, was like a different
man.
Although only 37 years old, he was
plagued by sickness and prone to fits of
depression,
and the novel he had been working on for
the last year was threatening to drive
him mad.
The publication of his most famous work
two years before, the novel Madame Bovary,
had brought him fame and wealth. But now
he was attempting to write a piece of
fiction quite unlike anything he had
ever attempted.
It would be a story from classical
history that took place in an empire
that had once flourished in the north of
Africa, had become the most powerful
society in the ancient world, and then
had vanished in its entirety more than
2,000 years ago, an empire that had been
largely forgotten beside the more
well-studied societies of Classical
Greece and Rome.
This was the empire of Carthage.
He had spent the last months locked up
in his study like a hermit, surrounded by
the work of ancient historians, trying to
bring the lost city of Carthage back to
life.
But the writing just wouldn't come, as he
wrote to his friend,
Ernest Feydeau.
I'm done for, my friend, done for!
The past month, I found it impossible to
write. I can't find a single word.
Just think of what I've let myself in
for, to resuscitate an entire
civilization with nothing whatsoever to
go on.
Flaubert made the decision that
something would have to change.
He wrote of his intentions to his friend,
Mademoiselle Leroyer de Chantepie.
I absolutely must take a trip to Africa;
so, toward the end of March, I'll return
to the land of dates.
Once again, Iíll live on horseback and sleep
under a tent.
I need only to go to El Kef and explore
the environs of Carthage in order to
acquaint myself thoroughly with the
landscapes I'll be describing.
When he arrived in the French colony of Tunisia,
Flaubert jotted down hurried impressions in his
notebooks as he explored the ruins of
the ancient cities of Utica and Carthage,
now all but buried beneath the modern
Tunisian capital of Tunis.
In the green wheat full of flowering
poppies, the road climbs a little, sloping
to the left, and arrives at a valley;
flat plains in the middle, at a league's
distance, ruins like palm trees, and here
and there, blocks of masonry. We are
walking on the remains of a Roman road.
As he walked among the ruined walls of
this ancient city, Flaubert felt himself
connected to the ancient people he had
been trying to write about,
and saw ways of life that must have
remained almost unchanged since the days
of Carthage.
In the South; the village of Sidi-bou-Said,
the sea behind like a great block of
indigo.
All Carthage now stretches out before me.
A camel on a terrace, turning a well;
flies are buzzing, weeds hang from the
halls like chandeliers.
A bird takes flight with the sound of a
wing; another sings; very fine dust,
silence, green marks on the walls, livid
and thick water in some basins.
By the time he had finished his
wanderings among the Carthaginian ruins
of Tunisia, Flaubert had decided to
completely rewrite the draft of his book,
as he writes to Mademoiselle de Chantepie.
Everything I had done on my novel has to
be done over. I was on the wrong track
entirely.
So, it turns out that a little over a
year since I first had the idea for the
book, and after working hard on it most
of that time, I am still only at the
beginning.
Armed with his Tunisian notebooks,
Flaubert finished his book four years later,
and it was published under the title of
Salammbo.
The book was an enormous success.
It inspired plays and later even silent
films, and it is credited with renewing
public interest in a city and a culture
that had once been considered a side
note of history.
As Flaubert walked those ruined walls
and sunken harbors, as he kicked his way
through the dust and scree of the
crumbling city ruins, he must have asked
himself again and again; what did it feel
like to walk the streets of that ancient
city? What was it like to see Carthage at
the height of its golden age,
and what would it have felt like to see
this entire city, its streets and houses,
its temples and theaters, its harbors and
its homes, utterly destroyed and buried
in dust and ash?
My name's Paul Cooper, and you're
listening to the Fall of Civilizations
Podcast.
Each episode, I look at a civilization of
the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history.
I want to ask, what did they have in
common? What led to their fall, and what
did it feel like to be a person alive at
the time who witnessed the end of their
world?
In this episode, I want to tell one of
the most dramatic stories to come down
to us from the ancient world, the rise
and fall of the empire of Carthage.
I want to show how this city rose out of
the Phoenician states of the Eastern
Mediterranean, and set out on voyages of
discovery and settlement that put them
at the center of the ancient world.
I want to describe the unique culture
that flourished on the shores of North
Africa, and I want to tell the story of
how the city of Carthage was destroyed
and its memory nearly wiped from the
Earth.
The Mediterranean Sea is a vast body of
salt water that lies between the
continents of Europe and Africa.
It's by far the largest inland sea on
the planet, stretching around 4,000
kilometers from end to end, and in the
West, it's connected to the Atlantic
Ocean by a thin opening of the Straits
of Gibraltar. The coastline
of this sea is more than 46,000
kilometers long, or enough to wrap around
the entire circumference of the planet,
and this coastline has provided a home
to countless cultures and civilizations
over history.
One of these cultures emerged on the
easternmost corner of the Mediterranean
coast, on a stony stretch of shore in
what is today Lebanon, overlooked by
towering mountains covered in cedar
forest.
Here, a series of city-states rose up
more than 4,000 years ago that would
give rise to a culture that would one
day be called the Phoenicians.
The largest of these cities were named
Tyre, Sidon, and Byblos.
Pinched as they were between the waves
to the west and the forested mountains
to the east, the territories they ruled
over were never large, but this
relatively isolated geography also meant
that they were somewhat protected from
invaders.
The people we now think of as Phoenician
wouldn't have ever used that word.
Phoenician is a term invented later by
their great rivals, the Greeks, and it's
unclear if these cities ever thought of
themselves as a unified people.
They had a common Phoenician language
and were united by the worship of
certain gods, among them, Baal Hammon,
a heroic god named Melqart, and his wife
Astarte, but there's very little in the
historical record to suggest a common
identity, architecture, or literature.
Even the Greek word Phoenician has a
somewhat mysterious origin. In the
earliest texts such as Homer's Iliad and
Odyssey, the word Phoinike is used to
describe a particular color of purple or
crimson, and it is also used to describe
a date palm, possibly due to the reddish
color of its fruit when ripe.
So, it's possible that the word came
to be used as a result of one of the
Phoenicianís earliest and most successful
industries.
The Phoenicians of Tyre and other cities
were the first people to color their
clothes with a particular kind of dye
derived from the bodies of predatory sea
snails known as the Murex, or rock snail.
These snails produce their dye as a
defense mechanism against predators, and
depending on the species, can produce a
vivid red or purple color quite unlike
anything else available in the ancient
world.
From the moment these dyes were first
used by Phoenicians around the 16th
century BC, their colors became
immediately sought after.
But the process of producing these dyes
was difficult and costly.
It could take more than 50 kilograms of
these snails to make a single gram of
dye, and so, these fabrics were extremely
expensive.
The color purple would soon become
associated with enormous wealth, and as a
consequence, with royalty.
This color would be known as Tyrian
Purple, after the Phoenician city of Tyre,
and later, Imperial Purple. It would dye
the robes of the emperors of Assyria,
Rome, and later, Byzantium.
The first-century Roman writer, Pliny the
Elder, writes about the effect this color
had on anyone who saw it.
For purple, the rods and axes of Rome
clear a path, and it likewise marks the
dignity of boyhood. It distinguishes
senator from noble, and it is summoned to
secure the favor of the gods. It
illuminates every garment, and on the
triumphal robe, it is blended with gold.
But why the price?
It's possible then that the term
Phoinike came to be used by the Greeks
to describe these traders from the rocky
coast of Lebanon as the makers of purple,
or the purple people.
The name of the mythical creature, the
phoenix, an immortal bird with red
feathers, also seems to derive from the
same word.
With their dye industry booming, the
Phoenicians began to set out on ever
longer voyages out into the
Mediterranean Sea, all in search of
ever more of these priceless snails, and
these longer voyages would require new
developments in shipbuilding.
Since as early as the third millennium
BC, Phoenician sailors from the city of
Byblos had developed ships with curved
hulls perfectly suited for traveling on
the waves, and they had developed
techniques for waterproofing the hulls
of their ships using bitumen or pitch.
In the Hebrew Bible, the 6th century BC
Book of Ezekiel contains one poetic
description of a Phoenician ship.
They made all your timbers of juniper
from Senir. They took a cedar from
Lebanon to make a mast for you.
Of oaks from Bashan they made your oars;
of cypress wood from the coasts of Cyprus
they made your deck, adorned with ivory.
Fine embroidered linen from Egypt was
your sail and served as your banner;
your awnings were of blue and purple
from the coasts of Elishah.
The Phoenicians were also some of the
earliest people to notice the pole star,
or Polaris, a star that happens to align
more or less perfectly with the
rotational axis of the Earth.
This means that while all other stars
appear to rotate in the sky throughout
the night as the Earth turns, the pole
star remains more or less fixed in place.
This made it exceptionally useful as a
navigation tool, a fixed reference point
in the sky.
In Greek, this star would even come to be
known as Phoinike, or the Phoenician Star.
The Phoenicianís early voyages around the
Mediterranean led to them encountering
many other peoples, and among these, they
began to cultivate a reputation as
uncompromising traders and shrewd
businessmen, something that seems to have
gained them some degree of unpopularity.
Homer's Odyssey, probably written down in
the 7th or 8th Century BC from even more
ancient oral traditions, describes the
Phoenicians as cunning and untrustworthy
in contrast to the supposedly noble
Greeks.
Thither came Phoenicians, men famed for
their ships, greedy knaves, bringing
countless trinkets in their black ship.
It seems the Phoenicians had become
adept at metalworking, too. The following
passage in Homer's Odyssey describes an
ornate bowl brought by traders from the
Phoenician city of Sidon.
Then the son of Peleus set forth other
prizes; a mixing bowl of silver, richly
wrought; in beauty, far the goodliest in
all the Earth, Sidonians, well skilled in
deft handiwork, had watered cunningly, and
men of the Phoenicians brought it over
the murky deep, and landed it in harbor.
As a seafaring people, the Phoenicians
had a clear preference for building
their cities on narrow, easily-defended
peninsulas, and where possible, on islands
set just offshore.
Their most influential city of Tyre was
a perfect example, located on a small
island just off the rocky coast.
In the Hebrew Bible, the prophet Ezekiel
gives us a sense of the trade that the
people of Tyre drove with their
surrounding neighbors.
Tarshish did business with you because
of your great wealth of goods. They
exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for
your merchandise.
Greece, Tubal, and Meshek did business
with you. They traded human beings and
articles of bronze for your wares. Men of
Beth Togarmah exchanged chariot horses,
cavalry horses, and mules. Aram exchanged
turquoise, purple fabric, embroidered work,
fine linen, coral, and rubies. Judah and
Israel traded with you; they exchanged
wheat from Minnith, honey, olive oil, and
balm.
While the natural defenses of their
geography had kept cities like Tyre
independent for much of their history,
this wasn't to last forever.
The first millennium BC was an age of
iron and an age of empires, and soon the
Phoenicians found themselves in a world
of increasingly violent and aggressive
neighbors.
Perhaps the most terrifying of these was
the power of the Assyrian Empire.
From its heartlands in what is today
Iraq, the Assyrian war machine would
periodically stretch its power right to
the coast of the Mediterranean, and
threatened to engulf the Phoenicians.
One inscription from the palace of an
Assyrian king gives just one example of
the typical fate of a city conquered by
the Assyrians.
That city I destroyed -- I flung my
soldiers like lightning upon them.
I piled up heaps of heads in front of
his great gate. Bands of captive soldiers
I impaled on stakes on every side of his
city.
His palm trees I cut down, and from the
city of Amidi, I departed.
The Phoenicians had every reason to be
nervous.
At the start of the 8th century BC, the
Assyrian king Adad-Nirari III conquered
the territory of Northern Syria, as he
boasts in his royal palace inscriptions.
Conquering from the Siluna mountain of
the Rising Sun and from the banks of the
Euphrates, the country of Hatti,  Amurra in
its full extent, the land of Tyre, the
land of Sidon, the land of Israel, the
land of Edom, the land of Philistia; I
made them submit to my feet, imposing
upon them tribute.
The Assyrians were now breathing
directly down the necks of the
Phoenician cities of the coast, but as
time went on, the Phoenicians were able
to carve out a niche for themselves that
ensured they were quite simply too
useful for the Assyrians to destroy.
The Mediterranean Sea had long been an
insurmountable challenge to many of the
region's great powers.
The Assyrians referred to it as Id-marrati,
or the Bitter River, which they believed
to flow around the whole Earth,
while the Egyptians referred to it as
Wadj-Wer, or the Great Green.
These Empires were freshwater river
cultures and navigated the waters of
their rivers in flat-bottomed barges.
For this reason, they had always remained
wary of the rougher waters of the sea.
Assyria relied heavily on many of the
commodities brought into the region by
Phoenician traders; incense, silver, and
purple dye for their palaces, bronze and
iron for their armies.
So, Assyria offered the cities of
Tyre and Sidon something of a deal.
They would be allowed a degree of
independence so long as they ensured a
constant flow of metals and other
resources into Assyria, and so long as
they acted as a kind of navy for hire,
providing their ships and sailors to
Assyria in times of war.
The Phoenicians had little choice but to
accept,
but there was one problem; the Assyrian
demands for metal were truly staggering,
and if they were going to be met, it
would require a drastic expansion of the
Phoenician trade network.
At first, the Phoenicians set up simple
trading posts anywhere they could find
good supplies of metal.
Archeology shows they set up trading
communities in Cyprus to take advantage
of its rich stores of copper, and in
Sardinia, the Mediterranean's second-
-largest island, rich in copper, iron,
silver, and lead.
At these sites, local people usually did
all the actual mining, while the
Phoenicians simply turned up to buy the
goods and take them away by ship. From
Cyprus and Sardinia, Phoenician sailors
pushed on into the west of the
Mediterranean
and set up a small colony of Utica in
North Africa, and even reached southern
Spain, where they found that the mines
practically overflowed with silver, iron,
and other metals.
Archaeologists have found huge
Phoenician furnaces in this region,
designed for smelting metal ingots for
transportation on an industrial scale,
all to satisfy the demands of the
fearsome Assyrian kings.
Before long, the Phoenicians were sailing
out through the Straits of Gibraltar,
then known as the Pillars of Hercules,
and out into the Atlantic Ocean.
They set up a colony at Lixus, on the
western coast of Morocco, and pushed
further down the coast to settle what is
now the Moroccan port town of
Essaouira, more than 4,000 kilometers from
their homeland.
To finance these expeditions, the
Phoenicians developed innovative
monetary systems that in some ways
represented a form of ancient capitalism.
Phoenician society was dominated by
powerful trading firms usually run by a
certain family, and they pioneered the
use of interest-bearing loans for
voyages, even developing Maritime
insurance policies, which paid out if
your ships were destroyed in a storm or
plundered by pirates.
But perhaps the greatest of their
innovations was something that we use
every day,
and that is the alphabet.
Up until that point, writing had been a
cumbersome and difficult task.
The cuneiform writing systems that had
been developed by the Sumerians
thousands of years before, and the
Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, were both
difficult to learn and relied on the
services of a learned class of scribes
who spent years of their lives learning
them. But the Phoenician alphabet was a
master class in simplicity. It had only
22 letters, and could be used to spell
out words phonetically, leaving out any
vowels. Quite ingeniously, the shapes
of the letters also gave a clue as to
how they were pronounced.
Their letter B, for instance, was named Bet,
which was the Phoenician word for house,
and its symbol was drawn with a pointed
roof. This simplicity drastically reduced
the amount of time it took to learn, and
meant that common traders and merchants
may have had some ability to read and
write, and to keep records essential for
the complex business of buying and
selling across the sea.
The Phoenician alphabet was such a good
idea that it was adopted almost
wholesale by the Greeks, as the Greek
historian Herodotus recounts.
These Phoenicians who came with Cadmus
brought with them to Greece, among many
other kinds of learning, the alphabet.
As time went on, the sound and form of
the letters were changed, and after being
taught the letters by the Phoenicians,
the Greeks, who were settled around them,
used them with a few changes of form.
With the addition of some letters for vowels,
what resulted was the Greek
alphabet, which means that the Phoenician
writing system is the foundation of all
Western alphabets used today.
The earliest piece of Phoenician writing
was found on an inscribed tablet known
as the Nora Stone, unearthed in Sardinia,
apparently commemorating a Phoenician
captain who may have died in conflict
with the local people.
He fought with the Sardinians at
Tarshish, and he drove them out.
Among the Sardinians, he is now at peace,
and his army is at peace; Milkaton,
son of Shubna, general of King Pummay.
But for the most part, the Phoenicians
seemed to have interacted with the
people they met relatively peacefully,
and most of all, profitably.
Before long, the cities of Tyre, Sidon, and
Byblos found themselves at the far east
of a sprawling trade network.
Keeping such a loose and disparate
collection of colonies together was no
easy task, but it seems that here, the
Phoenician religion played a key role.
The people of Tyre worshiped a heroic
god known as Melqart, a warrior hero who
the Greeks would later associate with
Hercules.
Temples to Melqart were set up at
multiple Phoenician trading posts, and
most had an olive tree, a symbol of the
city of Tyre, growing in their central
courtyard.
The grandest of these temples was built
at the furthest Phoenician colony from
Tyre, then known as Gades, what is
narrow the Spanish city of Cadiz.
This colony sat on the Atlantic coast
just outside the Straits of Gibraltar,
but it made up for its extreme distance
from Tyre with its immense opulence.
At the center of the temple stood an
olive tree, with its branches and leaves
wrought out of solid gold, holding
emerald fruits in its branches.
Women were forbidden entry to the temple,
as were pigs, and the priests of Melqart
went barefoot, wearing a band of Egyptian
flax over their bare heads.
The Greek geographer Strabo recounts the
following description of the settlement
of Gades.
Now, these islands are this side of what
are called the Pillars of Heracles. Gades,
however, is outside the pillars. Here live
the men who fit out the most and largest
merchant vessels, both for our sea and
the outer sea. They say the Tyrians
believe that the two capes which form
the strait were the ends of the
inhabited world.
A great ceremony, known as the Egersis
or Awakening, was conducted each year in
the temple of Gades.
During this time, all foreigners were
asked to leave the city, and a great
effigy of the god Melqart was set afloat
on the sea and burned.
Even this temple was a crucial part
of the Phoenician trading system.
The institution worked to guarantee the
quality of metal ingots produced in
Gades by giving them a special stamp,
and acted as a guarantor between
merchants entering into contracts, with
punishments promised from Melqart
himself if any dared to go back on their
word.
With Phoenician trade increasingly
drifting westward, the center of their
power would soon also shift in that
direction to a place where they would
finally be free of the overbearing
empires constantly breathing down their
necks.
They would soon found a city on the
shore of North Africa, right at the
center of the Mediterranean world,
a city that would become one of the
largest and wealthiest on Earth.
That city would one day be known as
Carthage.
Like so many aspects of our modern
understanding of the Phoenicians, the
name Carthage is itself a distortion,
filtered through the accounts of others.
In Latin, the city was known as Carthago,
while the Greeks called it Karkedon. But
to its inhabitants, it was known as
Qart-Hadasht, or in Phoenician, the New City.
Like many great cities of its time,
Carthage soon developed its own founding
myth.
It begins with a princess of Tyre named
Elissa or Elishaya. In the legend, the
king of Tyre promises that upon his
death, his kingdom would be split between
his two children, his daughter Elishaya,
and his son Pygmalion.
But when the old king dies, the
treacherous brother Pygmalion refuses to
accept the splitting of the kingdom and
moves to seize everything for himself,
even killing Elishaya's husband to
remove any potential rivals.
Stricken with grief, Elishaya flees down
to the docks, along with a ragtag band of
her royal guards and temple women, and
there they set sail westwards and make
for Africa.
The Roman writer Justinus, drawing on an
earlier Greek text, writes his rendition
of this story,
along with a cunning deception to slow
down any greedy pursuers.
Elissa put the attendants, who was sent
by the king to assist in her removal, on
board some vessels in the early part of
the evening, and sailing out into the
deep, made them throw some loads of sand
put up in sacks, as if it was money, into
the sea.
This group of refugees sail along the
coast of North Africa until eventually
they set ashore near the Phoenician
colony of Utica. They camp on a nearby
hill known as Byrsa, and the king who
rules there, a man named Iarbus, takes
pity on them, but not too much pity.
He offers to sell them a plot of land on
the hill no bigger than an ox hide.
But Elishaya is cunning; she cuts the
ox hide into thin strips, lining them up to
enclose the entire hill, a much larger
area of land than the miserly king had
intended.
Bound by his word, Iarbus has no choice
but to give them the land he promised,
and so, the city of Carthage is born.
Justinus recounts the city's early
flourishing.
Carthage was founded, an annual tribute
being fixed for the ground which it was
to occupy. At the commencement of digging
the foundations, an ox's head was found,
which was an omen that the city would be
wealthy, indeed, but laborious and always
enslaved. It was therefore removed to
another place, where the head of a horse
was found, which, indicating that the
people would be warlike and powerful,
portended an auspicious sight.
In a short time, as the surrounding
people came together at the report, the
inhabitants became numerous, and the city
itself extensive. From the hilltop of Byrsa,
the city grows and grows, soon eclipsing
King Iarbus' town of Utica, which makes
him understandably jealous. He demands
that Elishaya marry him so that he can
absorb her flourishing town and
everything she owns into his kingdom.
If she refuses, he will burn Carthage to
the ground.
Faced with the choice of this
capitulation or the destruction of her
new city, Elishaya builds a great pyre
and climbs onto it, saying that she must
indeed go to her husband, meaning not
Iarbus, but the man her brother had killed
on the other side of the sea, waiting for
her in the afterlife.
This tragic but noble self-sacrifice has
proven irresistible to generations of
poets, and the Roman poet Virgil gives
one rendition of this scene.
When the pyre of cut pine and oak was
raised high
in an innermost court open to the sky,
the queen hung the place with garlands,
and wreathed it with funeral foliage.
She laid his sword and clothes and
picture on the bed. She lingered a while,
in tears and thought,
then
cast herself on the bed and spoke her
last words; ìAccept
this soul,
and loose me from my sorrows.î
In honor of Elishaya's sacrifice, her
people gave her the title of Dido,
meaning female warrior or heroine, and
this is the name by which she would be
known to later Roman writers.
This Baroque tale of love and tragedy
has all the hallmarks of ancient
literature, and we can't assume that it
bears any relationship to what actually
happened.
Some details of the tale do accord with
what archeology tells us, that the
Carthaginian Phoenicians drew their
origins back to the city of Tyre, and
that the city was founded close to the
older settlement of Utica, which it soon
eclipsed in size.
But perhaps more important than any of
this is the sense that this founding
myth might give us of the way the
Carthaginians thought of themselves and
their city's place in the world, as a
city of survivors who had found refuge
here on the North African coast, a city
of sailors and adventurers.
They were resourceful and drove a hard
bargain. They were clever, fond of
outwitting their enemies, always finding
a way to make a little go a long way,
and also, perhaps that they would die
before they gave up their freedom.
Regardless of the truth of its origins,
it's clear from archeology that after
its founding in the 8th century BC, the
new colony of Carthage did grow
exceptionally quickly.
In many ways, it was the perfect
Phoenician settlement.
Carthage was built in a small bay that
itself belonged to a vast natural harbor,
known today as the Bay of Tunis.
The city sat on top of a series of sheer
red cliffs that looked down over the
glittering blue waters of the
Mediterranean in the north, and it was
also easily defended on its landward
side, where a range of rocky hills and a
number of lakes and saltwater lagoons
break the land into a series of narrow
approaches, protecting the city from any
would-be attackers.
The Roman writer Appian writes one
description of the city's location.
The city lay in a recess of a great gulf,
and was in the form of a peninsula. It
was separated from the mainland by an
isthmus about five kilometers in width.
From this isthmus, a narrow and longish
tongue of land, about a kilometer wide,
extended towards the west between a lake
and the sea.
Near to the site of Carthage flows a
river known today as the Mejerda, which
originates in the high Atlas Mountains
of North Africa. This river flows for 460
kilometers to the sea and brings crucial
fresh water into the bay, turning the
otherwise arid landscape green, and
providing water for drinking and
for irrigation.
As a result, the land here was abundant
with wheat, grapes, olives, and dates.
In the distance over the bay to the
south rises the blue outline of the
mountain Djebel Ressas, literally the
Mountain of Lead, a rugged outcrop of
Jurassic limestone climbing nearly 800
meters above the plain.
The hot desert winds, known as the
Sirocco, would blow in from the Sahara
during the summer season, rattling the
shutters on the windows and the leaves
of the date palms, and at the end of
summer, thunderstorms would roll in from
the sea.
As well as its ideal geography, the
city's location in the Mediterranean
world was also perfect.
Carthage sat at a crucial halfway point
between the city of Tyre and the wealthy
mines of Spain, but it was also only
about 200 kilometers by boat from the
island of Sicily and about 300
kilometers from Sardinia, two crucial
sites of Phoenician industry that were
only growing in importance.
Pottery found in even the earliest
layers of Carthage shows a huge range of
styles coming from Greece, Italy, Spain,
and all the Phoenician colonies.
The Phoenician world was now a web, with
Carthage sitting right at its center.
The city in these early days must have
been a humble sight.
Archeology paints a picture of a simple
collection of mud brick buildings lining
the seashore, but within a century, this
had exploded.
One graveyard soon had to be moved in
order to make space for a quarter filled
with metal-working workshops, and the
settlers built a wall about three meters
in height to protect their burgeoning
town.
Soon, more monumental buildings would
be constructed. The Roman poet Virgil
imagines the activity that must have
accompanied the growth of this town, from
tiny settlement to booming city.
Aeneas found where lately huts had been,
marvelous buildings, gateways, cobbled
ways, and din of wagons. There, the Tyrians
were hard at work, laying courses for
walls, rolling up stones to build the
citadel, while others picked out building
sites and plowed a boundary furrow. Laws
were being enacted, magistrates and a
sacred senate chosen. Here, men were
dredging harbors. There, they laid the
deep foundations of a theater and
quarried massive pillars.
Other than what we can glean from
archeology, we know very little about the
early history of Carthage apart from a
few short inscriptions. No Carthaginian
texts have survived into the modern day,
and so, in terms of written history, we
have virtually complete silence from
that part of the Mediterranean for the
first 200 years or so of its existence,
and beyond that, we have to rely on the
writings of others.
From the work of Greek writers, we
learned that Carthage was a republic.
It was ruled under a kind of oligarchic
system, governed by a council of its
wealthiest citizens.
The Greek philosopher Aristotle, writing
in the 4th century, spoke approvingly of
the Carthaginian system of government
and compares it to that of the Greek
city-state of Sparta.
Carthage also appears to have a good
constitution, with many outstanding
features as compared with those of other
nations, but most nearly resembling the
Spartan at some points. Many regulations
at Carthage are good, and a proof of a
well-regulated constitution is that the
populace willingly remain faithful to
the constitutional system, and that
neither civil strife has arisen in any
degree worth mentioning, nor yet a tyrant.
But Aristotle also warns that the
Carthaginian system put too much
emphasis on the wealth of its rulers
rather than their competence, and
expresses concerns that this could lead
to corruption.
They think that the rulers should be
chosen not only for their merit but also
for their wealth, as it is not possible
for a poor man to govern well or to have
leisure for his duties. It is a bad thing
that the greatest officers of state, the
kingship, and the general ship should be
for sale, for this law makes wealth more
honored than worth and renders the whole
state avaricious, and it is probable that
those who purchase their office will
learn by degrees to make a profit out of
it.
The highest echelons of Carthaginian
society were divided between the civil
leaders, the shofetim, or judges, and
the rabbim, or generals, who took care of
military matters.
These highest positions, senators and the
heads of committees, drew no salary for
their work, and so, they could
realistically only be held by those who
could support themselves on private
incomes, usually successful merchants or
wealthy landowners, but there was a
certain fairness to this.
There seems to have been no barrier
other than wealth, and people from common
backgrounds who became wealthy could
quickly rise to the highest parts of
government.
Certain powerful families were
constantly vying for the most powerful
positions, but there was no hereditary
royalty in Carthage.
It's possible that the myth of Elishaya
or Dido may have played a role in
maintaining this situation.
Since according to the legend, the city
was founded by a woman who had no
children, no one could ever claim to be
her true descendants or have any kind of
ancestral right to rule.
Instead, the city was governed by a
number of different semi-democratic
bodies made up of wealthy citizens.
One of these was called the Tribunal of
the 104, and another, the Council of
Elders, a kind of senate.
The highest executive position was held
by two elected officers who ruled
simultaneously and who were elected each
year.
The arrangement was complex and likely
prone to corruption, but for the most
part, it seems to have worked.
While Carthage flourished, the Phoenician
cities that had given birth to it began
to flounder.
Tyre and Sidon were still under the boot
of Assyria, and around 670 BC, the
Assyrian king Esarhaddon began to place
harsh restrictions on who they could
trade with.
When Assyria went to war with Egypt,
Esarhaddon forced the Phoenicians of Tyre
to place a trade embargo on the pharaohs.
Without access to their once most
lucrative market, these cities went into
decline.
Soon, the king of Tyre was not even
allowed to open messages without an
Assyrian official present, as the
following surviving fragment of one
treaty shows.
Nor must you open a letter which I send
you without the presence of the royal
deputy.
If the royal deputy is absent, wait for
him and then open it. If a ship of the
people of Tyre is shipwrecked off the
coast of the land of the Philistines or
anywhere on the borders of a Syrian
territory, everything that is on the ship
belongs to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
As a result of the decline of cities
like Tyre and Sidon, it's likely that
large numbers of Phoenicians would have
fled to what was now the undisputed
capital of the Phoenician world, the
booming port town of Carthage.
They brought with them their language,
their knowledge, their gods, and their
gold.
By the 6th century BC, Carthage was one
of the largest and wealthiest cities in
the Mediterranean,
and its sailors, the finest in the world,
would soon embark on voyages of
exploration that would not be matched
for another 2,000 years.
By this time, the Phoenicians had already
sailed right to the end of their world,
through the Pillars of Hercules, and out
into the Atlantic Ocean.
But their exploration didn't stop there.
In fact, if ancient sources are to be
believed, they may have been the first
navigators to successfully sail around
the entire coast of Africa.
Herodotus recounts one expedition that
supposedly took place around 600 BC,
sponsored by a pharaoh of Egypt named
Nechos, although he is frustratingly vague
and short on detail.
The expedition apparently set sail from
Egypt's Red Sea coast, voyaged around the
Horn of Africa and the South African
Cape, before sailing north through the
Gulf of Guinea and back into the
Mediterranean through the Pillars of
Hercules.
Nechos of Egypt sent Phoenicians and
ships, instructing them to sail on their
return voyage past the Pillars of
Heracles until they came into the
northern sea, and so, to Egypt.
So, the Phoenicians set out from the Red
Sea and sailed to the southern sea.
Whenever autumn came, they would put in
and plant the land in whatever part of
Libya they had reached, and there await
the harvest.
Then, having gathered the crop, they
sailed on, so that after two years had
passed, it was in the third that they
rounded the Pillars of Heracles and came
to Egypt.
There they said what some may believe,
though I do not,
that in sailing around Libya, they had
the sun on their right hand.
Interestingly, it is this detail that
Herodotus personally finds unbelievable
that has caused modern scholars to take
the claim more seriously.
The change in the position of the sun
relative to the ship suggests that the
voyage did indeed cross the Tropic of
Cancer, and perhaps even the equator,
causing the summer sun to appear in the
north.
Modern estimates consider a journey time
of three years to be a reasonable
duration for a circumnavigation of
Africa that would have been about
20,000 kilometers long, or half the way
around the world.
If this story is true, then it means the
Phoenicians may have rounded the Cape of
Africa more than 2,000 years before the
Portuguese explorer, Bortolemeu Dias,
would do the same thing in 1488, opening
up the passage to India and the age of
European colonialism.
More solidly attested voyages of
Phoenician discovery would see an
explorer named Hanno the Navigator sail
out into the Atlantic Ocean through the
Pillars of Hercules, and sail perhaps as
far south as Cameroon or Gabon in West
Africa.
His voyage is recounted in a Greek
translation entitled The Periplus, or
Travel Account of Hanno, supposedly an
accurate copy of an inscription that
actually hung in the temple of Baal Hammon
in Carthage.
It was decreed by the Carthaginians that
Hanno should undertake a voyage beyond
the Pillars of Hercules and found
Phoenician cities.
He sailed accordingly, with 60 ships or
50 oars each, and the body of men and
women to the number of 30,000, and
provisions and other necessaries.
Preceding a day's sail, we came to the
extremity of the lake that was overhung
by large mountains, inhabited by savage
men clothed in the skins of wild beasts,
who drove us away by throwing stones, and
hindered us from landing.
Sailing thence, we came to another river
that was large and broad, and full of
crocodiles and hippopotamuses.
Hanno writes down vivid descriptions of
seeing active volcanoes spewing lava
into the ocean, possibly the active
volcano Mount Cameroon.
Then quickly sailing forth, we passed
by a burning country full of fragrance,
from which great torrents of fire flowed
down to the sea, and we sailed along with
all speed, being stricken by fear.
After a journey of four days, we saw the
land at night covered with flames, and in
the midst there was one lofty fire
greater than the rest, which seemed to
touch the stars.
Hanno even seems to have been the first
to write down an encounter with what may
have been Earth's largest living
primates, with unfortunate results.
We arrived at a bay called the Southern
Horn, at the bottom of which lay an
island full of savage people, the greater
part of whom were women whose bodies
were hairy, and whom our interpreters
called Gorillae.
Though we pursued the men, we could not
seize any of them; but all fled from us,
escaping over the precipices and
defending themselves with stones.
Three women were, however, taken, but they
attacked their conductors with their
teeth and hands, and could not be
prevailed upon to accompany us.
Having killed them, we flayed them, and
brought their skins with us to Carthage.
We did not sail farther on, our
provisions failing us.
These hairy creatures may have been
chimpanzees, monkeys, or what we today
would call gorillas, all of which can be
encountered in the region of Cameroon.
On Hanno's return, the hairy skins he
brought home were kept in the temple to
the god Tanit in Carthage, and according
to Pliny the Elder, would remain in the
city for as long as it existed.
In the 19th century, when the American
physician and missionary Thomas Staughton
Savage and the naturalist Jeffries Wyman
wrote the first scientific description
of a gorilla, they gave them the name
Troglodytes gorilla after the
mysterious description in Hanno's writing,
and the name has stuck ever since.
Another explorer named Himilco sailed
out into the Atlantic and went in the
opposite direction, sailing north up the
coast of Spain and France, and even on to
the British Isles.
Here, he saw Celtic tribespeople sailing
in coracles made of deerskin, a sight he
found remarkable.
They cleave the tempestuous sea and the
current of the ocean abounding in
monsters, with woven boats. Indeed, these
people do not know how to fashion keels
with pine and maple, but in a miraculous
thing, they always fit out vessels from
hides stretched together, and often
travel through the immense sea in a
skin.
Himilco also brought back stories of the
vast expanse of the Atlantic to the West,
a frightening sight to the sailors brought
up in the enclosed inland sea of the
Mediterranean.
Beyond, towards the area to the West,
there is a sea without end.
The ocean lies open across a wide area,
and the sea stretches out.
No man has entered upon these seas,
because the sea lacks winds that would
drive the ships along, and no breeze from
the sky favors a ship.
It also seems that he may have seen
whales swimming out there in the ocean,
which were then nearly four times more
numerous than they are today.
Here and there, sea monsters swim amid
the slow ships sluggishly crawling along.
Himilco reported that he had once seen
these creatures in the ocean and proved
their existence. These we have related to
you, revealed a long time ago deep in the
annals of the Carthaginians.
In 2019, a team of twenty modern sailors
successfully piloted a replica of a
single-mastered Carthaginian merchant
vessel across the Atlantic Ocean,
departing from the site of Carthage and
landing in the Caribbean five months
later, demonstrating that Phoenician
ships had the ability to reach the
Americas 2,000 years before
Columbus.
As the city of Carthage grew, its
population boomed.
While some ancient writers record it as
having a population of more than 700,000
people, this is thought to be unlikely.
But estimates based on the size of the
city and the size of civilian armies
drawn up in times of crisis have
suggested that the population may have
reached 400,000.
By the year 400 BC, the city walls had
been rebuilt to now stand a towering 15
meters high, with a triple line of
ditches and defenses on the landward
side. The hill of Byrsa, where legend has
it that Elishaya played her trick with
the ox hide, was now itself ringed with
an inner defensive wall and loomed over
the rest of the city as a fortified
citadel.
The Roman writer Appian writes the
following description of the city.
On the seaside, the city was protected by
a single wall. Toward
the south and the mainland, where the
citadel of Byrsa stood on the isthmus,
there was a triple wall. The height of
each wall was 15 meter without counting
parapets and towers,
which was separated from each other by a
space of 60 meters.
One of the most remarkable features of
ancient Carthage was the innovative
design of its harbor, known as the cothon.
Likely built sometime in the third or
second century BC, this comprised a large,
rectangular commercial harbor for
civilian ships that led into a unique,
circular docking bay for the military
ships of Carthage's war fleet.
The harbor was so large that today the
shape of its outline can still be seen
in the coast of the city of Tunis.
Appian describes the unique design of
this harbor.
The harbors have communication with each
other and a common entrance from the sea
20 meters wide, which could be closed
with iron chains.
The first port was for merchant vessels,
and here were collected all kinds of
shipsí tackle.
Within the second port was an island
which, together with the port itself, was
enclosed by high embankments. These
embankments were full of shipyards, which
had capacity for 220 vessels.
Above, there were magazines for their
tackle and furniture.
Two ionic columns stood in front of each
dock.
On the island was built the admiral's
house, from which the trumpeter gave
signals, the herald delivered orders, and
the admiral himself overlooked
everything.
At this time, Carthage had the largest
and most powerful fleet in the
Mediterranean, and the military port was
built to conceal the ships docked within
and ensure that no spies could glean any
of their secrets or keep tabs on their
movements.
The island lay near the entrance to the
harbor and rose to a considerable height
so that the admiral could observe what
was going on at sea while those who were
approaching by water could not get any
clear view of what took place within.
Not even the incoming merchants could
see the docks, for a double wall enclosed
them, and there were gates by which
merchant ships could pass from the first
port of the city without traversing the
dockyards. Such was the appearance of
Carthage at the time.
Between the harbor and the citadel of
Byrsa on the hill stood the Agora, the
large open marketplace of the city, where
all manner of goods and foods could be
bought.
Archaeological studies of plant matter
found in Carthage show that the ancient
Carthaginians enjoyed a varied diet.
Walking through the markets of the city,
you would be able to buy wheat, barley, and
other grains, numerous vegetables like
artichokes and cabbages, pulses and
lentils, and fruits including
pomegranates, grapes, figs, olives, peaches,
plums, and melons, as well as nuts like
pistachios and almonds.
Olives were pressed into oil, and its
people ate fish like grey mullet, sea
perch, eels, and dolphins, as well as the
meat of sheep, pigs, goats, chickens, and
occasionally even dogs.
The Carthaginians, like most people in
the ancient world, were obsessed with a
pungent salty source known as garum,
which was brewed from the fermenting of
fish entrails, and which was probably
similar to the fish sauce used today in
East Asian cuisine.
In the wreck of one Carthaginian ship
found off the coast of Sicily in Masala,
archaeologists have also uncovered the
remains of cannabis stalks which may
have been chewed by the ship's rowers,
and could also have been enjoyed on land,
either chewed or brewed into a tea.
Wine was particularly beloved, too, and
especially a particular kind of sweet
dessert wine made from sun-dried grapes.
One agricultural handbook, written by a
Carthaginian named Mago, has survived
in fragments of Greek and Latin
translation, and it describes the process
of making this wine.
Pick some well-ripened, early grapes.
Discard any that are mildewed or damaged.
Lay down reeds and spread the grapes out
in the sun on top. Cover them at night so
that the dew will not moisten them.
When they are dried, pick the grapes off
stems and put them in a jar or pitcher.
Add some un-fermented wine, the best you
have, until the grapes are just covered.
After six days, when the grapes have
absorbed it all and are swollen, put them
in a basket, put them through the press,
and collect the resulting liquid. Bottle
the liquid in stopper jars, and after 20
or 30 days, when the fermentation is over,
coat the lids with plaster and cover
them with leather.
As a typical Phoenician city, Carthage
initially had a small footprint in North
Africa and in its early days, it was
reliant on its overseas territories in
Sardinia and Sicily for more than half
of its food, brought across the sea on
grain ships.
But in the 6th century, it began to
expand its territory around the city.
The Carthaginians either expelled local
people or came to agreements with them,
and built a network of towns and forts to
the south, east, and west, and began to
farm the land themselves.
A later writer, Diodorus of Sicily, would
pan the following description of the
abundant hinterland that would soon
stretch beyond the city.
All the lands were set with gardens and
orchards, watered by numerous springs and
canals.
There were well-constructed country
houses built with lime along the route,
announcing widespread wealth.
The land was cultivated with vines, olive
trees, and a whole host of fruit trees. On
both sides, there were herds of oxen and
sheep grazing on the plain, and near the
main pastures and the marshes, there were
studs of horses.
In its outposts in Sardinia, Spain, and
Sicily, Carthage began a similar process,
turning what had once been small trading
posts into more solid and fortified
territories with their own agricultural
land.
Soon, the city of Carthage would be more
or less self-sufficient, as the Roman
writer Appian describes.
Gradually acquiring strength, they
mastered Africa and the greater part of
the Mediterranean,
carried war into Sicily and Sardinia and
the other islands of that scene, and also
into Spain. They sent out numerous
colonies.
They became a match for the Greeks in
power and next to the Persians in wealth.
The typical Carthaginian house was built
around a central courtyard, and the
wealthier dwellings had an upstairs and
a terrace.
Finer houses had cupboards and shelves
built into the walls, and often a clay
bread oven.
We can imagine the smells of this baking
bread wafting through the city streets,
along with the pungent aromas from the
tanneries and wineries, the smells of
animals and incense, cooked fish, and
salty garum sauce.
Wealthy houses also contained elaborate
bathrooms with separate changing
facilities, and baths plastered with
water-resistant stucco. Before bathing,
oil would be applied to the body, and a
bronze tool known as a strigil was used
to scrape dirt from the skin.
While in Greek houses these bathrooms
were usually built off the kitchen, the
Carthaginians built their bathrooms next
to the entrance to the house, suggesting
that there was some sort of ritual
purpose to the bathing,
separating the dusty, unclean world of
outside from the clean inner space of
the home.
A variety of animals would have been
visible on the crowded city streets.
These would have included beasts of
burden like donkeys, oxen, and horses, stray
dogs and cats, and noisy caravans of camels
coming in from the desert.
But they also seem to have drawn animals
as curiosities from all parts of Africa.
A species of huge lion known as the
Barbary lion could be found all across
this region and would later be captured
for spectacles, including in the Roman
arenas,
and a species of monkey known as the
Barbary macaque is also native to this
area.
Diodorus of Sicily records one account of
Carthaginians keeping these monkeys as
apparently much-beloved pets.
In these cities, many of the customs were
very different from those current among
us.
For the apes lived in the same houses as
the men, being regarded among them as
gods, just as the dogs are among the
Egyptians, and from the provisions laid
up in the storerooms, the beasts took
their food without hindrance whenever
they wished.
For any who killed this animal, as if he
had committed the greatest sacrilege,
death was established as the penalty.
Around this time, monkeys began appearing
as a motif in the art of regions of
Italy, Sardinia, and elsewhere, suggesting
that the Carthaginians were even
exporting this animal to other regions.
Some Barbary macaques were mummified in
Egyptian tombs alongside pharaohs, and
the skull of a Barbary macaque dated to
around this time has even been unearthed
as far away as Northern Ireland.
Of course, in vast stables to the
south of the city, were kept the animals
that in most people's minds are most
inseparably associated with the city of
Carthage;
that is the elephant.
The North African elephant is an extinct
subspecies of the African elephant that
lived north of the Sahara Desert.
Carthaginian paintings on walls, coins,
and mosaics show that these elephants
had the swooping backs and large ears
typical of the African elephant that
roams the Savannah,
but it was considerably smaller and was
likely similar in size to another
surviving subspecies, the African forest
elephant.
These reach a shoulder height of about
two and a half meters, only a little
taller than the largest Shire horses, but
of course, their thick and heavy frames
mean they weigh more than 15 times the
average horse.
For this reason, these elephants were
used by the Carthaginians as fearsome
weapons of war.
Some historians have speculated that
Carthage may also have imported some
much larger Indian elephants, which were
at that time being used by the Seleucid
dynasty in Syria.
One elephant that was the pride of the
later Carthaginian army was known by the
name Surus, which some have translated to
mean the Syrian.
If true, this Syrian elephant would have
towered as much as a meter over the
smaller Carthaginian elephants, and would
have been a truly terrifying sight on
the battlefield.
In India and Southeast Asia, it has
always been common to use elephants as
work animals to transport heavy loads
for construction, but it's not clear
whether the Carthaginians used their
elephants in this manner or whether
these precious animals were only
reserved for their power and prestige, to
be used as living tanks on the
battlefield, as the writer Pliny the
Elder prescribes.
Elephants, when tamed, are employed in war
and carry into the ranks of the enemy
towers filled with armed men,
and on them, in a very great measure,
depends the ultimate result of the
battles that are fought in the East.
They tread underfoot whole companies and
crush the men in their armor.
But I think it's not hard to imagine
that as in India, elephants may also have
been used ceremonially in festivals and
parades to carry kings and generals, a
living embodiment of the might of this
new empire.
While Carthage didn't hesitate to go to
war to defend its interests and protect
its trade, it was not at heart a warrior
culture, and it never suffered a conflict
to continue any longer than it
absolutely had to.
The Carthaginians often relied on
diplomatic solutions and agreements to
avoid fighting with their various
neighbors in the Mediterranean.
One such agreement was settled in the
year 509 BC with a minor city-state in
central Italy, in the region of Latium,
whose people spoke a small Italic
dialect called Latin.
This city's people had just that year
thrown off the rule of their Etruscan
king and abolished kingship in the city
for good. In place of a king, they had
brought in the rule of a pair of elected
consuls drawn from the aristocracy, a
system strikingly similar to and perhaps
even inspired by the Carthaginians.
This city's name was Rome.
The Romans at that time were among
several powers in central Italy facing
rivals in the Etruscans to the north, and
powerful tribal confederacies like the
Samnites all fighting for dominance
in the plains of central Italy.
The Carthaginians seem to have taken
note of this regional development and
proceeded to sign a treaty with this new
Roman republic,
the contents of which the Greek
historian Polybius records.
There shall be friendship between the Romans
and their allies, and the Carthaginians and their
allies, on these conditions;
neither the Romans nor their allies are
to sail beyond the fair peninsula unless
driven by stress of weather or the fear
of enemies. If any one of them be driven
ashore, he shall not buy or take anything
for himself, save what is needed for the
repair of his ship and the service of
the gods, and he shall depart within five
days. Carthage shall build no fort in
Latium, and if they enter the district in
arms, they shall not stay a night therein.
The theme of this treaty was simple; you
leave us alone and we will leave you
alone.
While Rome was at this point very
much on the Carthaginian's radar, it
seems that they considered this Italian
city republic to be little cause of
concern.
Around the year 410 BC, Carthage began
minting its own silver coins, and each
coin would be stamped with the symbol of
a palm tree in Greek, known as Phoenike,
now becoming a symbol of Phoenician
identity.
Carthage was now presenting itself as
the new champion of the Phoenician
people, the capital of the Phoenician
world.
It was now beginning to look a lot Like
an empire, and like all empires, it soon
found an increasing need to defend and
expand its territory.
It's often said that Carthage relied on
mercenaries to fight its wars, but this
is something of an oversimplification.
While these kinds of armies-for-hire did
make up one part of their forces, in fact,
there were all kinds of reasons that
people came to fight for the empire of
Carthage.
Many of their soldiers were sent to
fight for them as part of treaties, just
as the Phoenicians had once promised to
send their ships to fight for Assyria.
As Carthage expanded to conquer new
peoples all along the North African
coast and across the Mediterranean,
ever more power and variety was added to
its forces.
When war came, each ally and province
would send fighters of a particular kind
based on what they specialized in.
The North African power of Numidia to
the west of Carthage sent powerful and
experienced cavalry and javelin-throwers,
while colonies in the island of Majorca
would send slingers, and peasant spearmen
with large, round shields were
conscripted from the fields of Libya in
the East.
Celts from Spain made up some part of
their forces, and sometimes even Greeks
and Italians ended up fighting in these
armies.
There was only one group of people who
hardly ever fought for Carthage, and that
was the citizens of Carthage themselves.
The Carthaginian system relied largely
on making life as comfortable as
possible for the people of the capital.
Few Carthaginian politicians ever risked
the unpopular move of conscripting its
citizens into the army, and so, they
amassed their forces out of units
brought from all the four corners of the
empire. Each army of Carthage was its own
unique patchwork and would have spoken
dozens of different languages, as the
Greek historian Polybius writes.
It was therefore impossible to assemble
them and address them as a body or to do
so by any other means, for how could any
general be expected to know all their
languages? And again to address them
through several interpreters, repeating
the same thing four or five times, was, if
anything, more impractical.
It was a system that had many weaknesses,
but it allowed the empire to raise
large armies at short notice, and it
meant that since they could never be
accused of sending good Carthaginian men
to die, the politicians of the city were
largely insulated from the consequences
of going to war.
But soon these armies would find
themselves embroiled in a bitter
struggle that would test this system to
its breaking point and threaten to bring
the whole empire to the brink of
destruction.
These wars would erupt over what would
soon become the most fought-over piece
of land in the Mediterranean;
that is the island of Sicily.
Sicily is the largest island in the
Mediterranean Sea.
It sits off the southern end of Italy,
separated by the narrow waters of the
Straits of Messina, only three kilometers
wide at its narrowest point.
Sicily's most prominent landmark is the
volcano Mount Etna, towering
3,000 meters over its eastern coast,
and due to the islandís particularly
violent geology, this is one of the most
active volcanoes in the world.
Although we think of it today as part of
Europe, Sicily is actually on the
northern edge of the African continental
plate, right at the impact point where
the European plate is grinding it
downwards into the Earth's mantle.
The collision of these titanic forces
means that Mount Etna erupts an average
200 times every year.
The volcanic ash spewed by this volcano
gives the soil of Sicily an incredible
fertility, meaning that its farmlands
have always been rich.
At first, Carthage enjoyed an unrivaled
position on the island, trading with the
Sicilian locals in the west just a short
hop away from their capital in Africa,
but soon they would come into conflict
with another group of people that for
much of this history would be their
greatest rivals on the sea and the land,
a people who were at the same time also
busy establishing colonies across the
Mediterranean.
These were the Greeks.
The Greeks, like the Phoenicians, were
expert sailors and had built a number of
thriving colonies in southern Italy, in
what is now Turkey and in the Black Sea.
Beginning in the 8th century BC,
Greek explorers and traders began
expanding their interests onto the
island of Sicily.
Like the Phoenicians, the Greeks at this
time weren't a unified people.
They spoke four different dialects of
Greek and countless sub-dialects, and
came from dozens of independent
city-states and island kingdoms that
often fought with each other more
bitterly than with any foreigners.
But despite these internal divisions, the
Greeks would expand across the southern
portion of Italy and Sicily, and joined
up this series of colonies into an area
that they would call Megale Hellas, or
Greater Greece.
Wherever they went, Greek settlers were
in part inspired by the myth of their
hero Heracles, who the Romans would call
Hercules.
He was a half-divine warrior who
traveled the length and breadth of
Europe, performing his famous twelve
labors, and meanwhile performing great
deeds wherever he passed through.
Wherever a new Greek colony sprung
up around the Mediterranean, a new
installment of the Hercules myth would
quickly be added, to show that this had
also been one of his stops. In some
places, he was celebrated for slaying
giants and mythical beasts, while in
others his feats were more mundane.
In the Greek colonies of southern Italy,
he was remembered for banishing a plague
of flies that was harming the livestock.
In Crete, he had rid the island of wild
beasts, and in Sicily, he had caught an
errant bull and bested the king in a
wrestling match.
In Spain, Diodorus of Sicily recounts that
depending on who you asked, Hercules was
credited with either creating the
Straits of Gibraltar by tearing the land
apart or with narrowing it to keep out
sea monsters.
Whereas before that time a great space
had stood between Africa and Europe, he
now narrowed the passage, in order that
by making it shallow and narrow he might
prevent the great sea monsters from
passing out of the ocean and into the
inner sea.
Some authorities, however, say just the
opposite, namely that the two continents
were originally joined and that he cut a
passage between them, that the ocean was
mingled with the sea.
On this question, however, it would be
possible for every man to think as he
may please.
In one of the most dramatic episodes of
these tales, during his tenth labor,
Hercules is tasked with stealing the red
cattle of the ogre Geryon, who lived in
Erythia in southern Spain, close to the
Phoenician colony of Gades.
Since Geryon lived so far in the west, it
was said, the hides of his cattle had
been stained red by their close
proximity to the setting sun.
After killing Geryon, Hercules takes his
cattle and herds them all the way back
home to Greece in a meandering route
that took him from Spain, through
southern France, and over the soaring
snowy mountains of the Alps, and on into
Italy, as Diodorus recounts.
Hercules then made his way to Italy, and
as he traversed the mountain pass
through the Alps, he made a highway out
of the route, which was rough and almost
impassible. The barbarians who had
inhabited this mountain region had been
accustomed to butcher and to plunder
such armies as pass through when they
came to the difficult portions of the
way, but he subdued them all.
The story of Hercules bringing these
cattle from Spain over these mountains
was the dramatic pinnacle of a series of
myths that would become known as the
Heraclean way.
It was a series of stories that would be
told to countless generations of Greek
settlers and then to the children of the
Romans who followed them. As the
Phoenician hero god Melqart became
increasingly associated with Hercules in
later years, these stories would also be
told to the children of Carthage.
With stories of this wandering hero on
their lips, the Greek settlements in
eastern Sicily grew.
For several centuries, they maintained an
uneasy peace with the Carthaginian
colonies in the west of the island,
but as both powers began to require
greater amounts of land, they would soon
find themselves on a collision course.
The exact dating and details of these
wars is still fiercely contested, but
it's clear that by the late 5th century
BC, Sicily had erupted in warfare between
Carthage and the Greeks.
Soon, it would resemble a piece of meat
being torn apart by two hungry dogs.
The economy of the island suffered.
Warlords established themselves as the
tyrant rulers of its cities, and banditry
and lawlessness spread.
For much of these centuries of fighting,
the Carthaginians were happy to let the
wars with the Greeks simmer on.
The citizens of its capital never went
to war, and so long as the peace and
comfort of their city was never
disturbed, it must have felt to them that
these wars were a very long way from
home.
But the final episode of these conflicts,
known as the Seventh Sicilian War, would
puncture this sense of invulnerability.
That's because Carthage would find
itself in a life or death struggle with
a man who would bring the war home to
their shores in dramatic fashion. He was
a king of Syracuse, a Greek city-state on
the southeastern coast of Sicily, and his
name was Agathocles.
Agathocles began life as a commoner
in the Sicilian colonies, the son of a
potter in the port city of Syracuse.
At first he learned his father's trade,
but soon entered the army and rose
through its ranks until he was able to
enact a military coup and seize the
throne of the city, in the year 317 BC.
Agathocles had a high opinion of
himself, and as the tyrant of Syracuse, he
minted silver coins that portrayed
himself as the heir to Alexander the
Great, the greatest of all the Greeks,
and like Alexander, Agathocles had
dreams of conquest. He soon set about
subjugating cities all around him, as the
historian Diodorus of Sicily recalls.
Agathocles began unhampered to
subject the cities and strongholds to
himself.
Mastering many of them quickly, he made
his power secure.
In fact, he built up for himself a host
of allies, ample revenues, and a
considerable army.
He had picked a mercenary force
comprising 10,000 foot soldiers and
3,500 horse.
Moreover, he prepared a store of weapons
and of missiles of all kinds, since he
knew that the Carthaginians would
shortly wage war against him.
As predicted, it wasn't long before the
Carthaginians began to see Agathocles as
a serious threat.
Carthage amassed a huge army in its
usual way, gathering mercenaries and
levees from all of its territories and
allies; slingers, spearmen, cavalry,
elephants, likely speaking a dozen
different languages, and sailed all of
them to Sicily.
On the way, many of their ships were
wrecked in a storm, but the force that
arrived was still easily enough to
overpower the tyrant Agathocles, as
Diodorus recounts.
As Agathocles saw the forces of
the Carthaginians were superior to his
own, he surmised that not a few of the
strongholds could go over to the
Phoenicians, and also those of the cities
that were offended with him. After a
stinging defeat on the Himera River in
central Sicily, Agathocles retreated east
to his port capital of Syracuse, where
the Carthaginians surrounded the city
and laid siege.
For Agathocles, it looked like all hope
was lost,
but it's here in this desperate moment
that he decided on a truly daring course
of action.
He hatched a plan to break free of the
siege by ship, set sail for Africa, and
make a desperate strike at the heart of
his enemy, the city of Carthage itself.
When he saw that all his allies had
changed sides and that barbarians were
masters of almost all Sicily except
Syracuse and were far superior in both
land and sea forces, he carried out an
undertaking that was unexpected and most
reckless.
He determined to leave an adequate
garrison for the city, to select those of
the soldiers who were fit, and with these
to cross over into Libya, for he hoped
that if he did this, those in Carthage
who had been living luxuriously in long-
-continued peace and were therefore
without experience in the dangers of
battle, would easily be defeated.
When the Carthaginians saw the Greek
fleet leaving Syracuse, they believed
Agathocles to be fleeing, and they pursued
him.
They chased the Greeks, harrying them
across the sea for hundreds of
kilometers, pelting them with arrows and
slingstones.
But luck was on the side of the Greeks,
and Agathocles and his soldiers were
able to land on the beaches of Africa.
Agathocles must have feared that his
soldiers would lose courage and attempt
to flee, and so, he ordered their ships to
be burned in an offering to the gods, as
Diodorus recounts.
Standing by the stern, he bade the others
also to follow his example.
Then, as all the captains threw in the
fire and the flames quickly blazed high,
the trumpeter sounded the signal for
battle and the army raised the war cry,
while altogether prayed for a safe
return home.
This Agathocles did, for it was clear
that if the retreat to the ships was cut
off, in victory alone would they have
hope for safety. Nevertheless, when all
the ships were aflame and the fire was
spreading widely, terror laid hold upon
the Sicilians as they considered the
vastness of the sea that separated them
from home.
From the city walls of Carthage, the
fires of the burning ships would have
been visible on the horizon, and now fear
was beginning to spread among its
citizens.
For them, war was something that happened
in other places.
The city had never been significantly
threatened before, and there were
virtually no forces there to defend it.
Panic and great confusion seized upon the
city.
The crowds rushed to the marketplace, and
the Council of Elders consulted what
should be done.
In fact, there was no army at hand that
could take the field against the enemy.
The mass of the citizens, who had no
experience in warfare, were already in
despair, and the enemy was thought to be
near the walls.
For the first time, the citizens of
Carthage would actually have to fight.
They were conscripted en masse, given long
spears and shields, perhaps given some
rudimentary training, and along with the
small complement of city guards, marched
out to meet the Greeks in battle.
The Carthaginians hoped to make up for
the poor quality of their citizen troops
with sheer numbers, and, vastly
outnumbering Agathocles, they were
confident of victory, but that was not to
be the case.
When they met, the experienced and now
desperate Greeks smashed the citizen
soldiers of Carthage, ran them off the
battlefield, and flooded into their camp.
Here, Diodorus writes that they made a
telling discovery.
In the camp of the Carthaginians were
found, along with other goods, many wagons
in which were being transported more
than 20,000 pairs of manacles. For the
Carthaginians, having expected to master
the Greeks easily, had passed the word
along among themselves to take alive as
many as possible, and, after shackling,
to throw them into slave pens.
With this army defeated, the city of
Carthage was now completely surrounded
by hostile forces, and Diodorus can't
help but comment on the ridiculous
nature of the situation.
In Sicily, the Carthaginians, who had
defeated Agathocles in a great battle,
were besieging Syracuse, but in Libya,
Agathocles had brought the
Carthaginians under siege.
It's here that the Carthaginians, in
their desperation, seem to have turned to
an ancient ritual that forms one of the
darkest and most controversial aspects
of their history;
that is, the rite of child sacrifice.
Human sacrifice was, at certain times, a
feature of various societies in the
ancient world. Rituals of this kind have
been attested in several indigenous
American societies and in the early
histories of Israel and Judah, as well as
the cities of Phoenicia, like Tyre and
Sidon.
The Book of Kings records one king of
the Levantine kingdom of Moab
sacrificing his firstborn child when a
war isn't going his way.
In Ireland, Britain, and Northern Germany,
during the Iron Age, sacrificial victims
were ritually strangled and cast into
bogs, where the acidic waters mummified
them in a state of perfect preservation.
This idea of a deadly exchange with the
gods seems to be one that recurs in
human psychology, and has independently
arisen in multiple cultures. The idea
that if we want to ask the gods for a
great favor, we have to give them
something truly precious in exchange, and
what could be more precious than a human
life?
With the writing down of the Hebrew
Bible and the law codes of Moses, this
practice was condemned and outlawed in
much of the Levant, and from then on,
animals were sacrificed in the place of
human victims.
In Tyre and other Phoenician cities, the
practice also seems to have died out in
the first millennium,
but there is one place it seems to have
continued well into the second century
BC, and that is Carthage.
These were violent times, when human life
was cheap, but even so, these rituals were
mentioned with some revulsion by several
ancient writers, among them the Greek
philosopher Plato.
With us, for instance, human sacrifice is
not legal but unholy, whereas the
Carthaginians perform it as a thing they
account holy and legal, and that too when
some of them even sacrifice their own
sons.
At first, these rituals seem to have been
an authentic sacrifice, giving up the
life of one of your own children in the
hope of receiving favor from the gods,
but before long, wealthy Carthaginians
found a way around this.
In fact, they seem to have developed a
macabre industry, a trade in other
people's children for sacrifice.
The writer Plutarch describes this
system and gives a sense for the
atmosphere of these grisly rituals.
Those who had no children would buy
little ones from poor people, and
cut their throats as if they were so
many lambs or young birds.
Meanwhile, the mother stood by without a
tear or moan,
but should she utter a single moan or
let fall a single tear, she had to
forfeit the money,
and her child was sacrificed
nevertheless.
The whole area before the statue was
filled with a loud noise of flutes and
drums so that the cries of wailing
should not reach the ears of the people.
For a long time, it was assumed that
these stories were exaggerations, pieces
of Greek propaganda designed to demonize
their enemies in Carthage, but more
modern archaeological discoveries have
more or less confirmed that child
sacrifice did take place at least at
some times, and at least by some people
in the city.
Large collections of buried urns
containing the cremated remains of
children have been found in large temple
sites known as tophets. Some of these
temples are exceedingly large, with
collections of cremation urns exceeding
2,000 in number.
Archeology has uncovered masks and
symbols at these sites, incense burners,
and other paraphernalia of ritual,
suggesting that the ceremonies were
highly structured.
It is worth being cautious with these
findings.
At most of the sites, analysis has shown
that the vast majority of these
children's remains are of stillborn
babies or babies that had died of
natural causes.
At a time when child mortality has been
estimated at around 30 to 40 percent, the
Carthaginians may have considered the
tragedy of infant death to be a kind of
sacred sign,
a human life being taken back by the
gods, and the bodies of these children
were burned in the tophets as a result.
The relative lack of children's remains
in the regular graveyards of the city
seem to show that these tophets were at
least in part cremation sites for the
remains of children who had died of
other causes,
but analysis of the ages of other
remains at other times don't seem to fit
with patterns of child mortality.
However the ritual had begun, at least in
the later years of the city, it had
evolved into something much darker and
crueler.
The inscriptions at these later sites of
sacrifice left over the cremation urns
don't seem to leave much room for
interpretation, as this typical example
shows.
To Lady Tinnit, face of Baal and Lord Baal
Hammon; the thing that Arish, son of
Bodashtart, son of Baalshillem, maker of
strigils, vowed, because the Lord heard
his voice.
There are countless of these
inscriptions, and they all follow this
pattern. The child was not offered up
front, but was promised in advance if the
gods came through on their request. The
Greek historian Cleitarchus seems to
confirm this order of events.
The Phoenicians, and above all, the
Carthaginians, whenever they were eager
for a great thing to succeed, made a vow
by one of their children.
If they would receive the desired things,
they would sacrifice to the gods.
A bronze Kronos, having been erected by
them, stretched out upward hands over a
bronze oven to burn the child. The flame
of the burning child reached its body
until, the limbs having shriveled up and
smiling mouth appeared to be almost
laughing,
it would slip into the oven.
We can't imagine the kinds of things
people might have asked for in exchange
for these sacrifices.
Perhaps in some instances, we can imagine
the ritual was performed out of
desperation, an extreme measure.
Other times, perhaps the wishes were
trivial; good weather on a journey, maybe,
good fortune and wealth in the year to
come, or the downfall of a business rival.
Whatever their wish was, it seems that if
it went on to come true, the child's fate
would be sealed.
With only fragmentary secondhand
accounts and the little that can be
gleaned from archaeological sites, we're
left guessing about the questions that
desperately need answers; how widespread
this practice was in society, why and
when people engaged in it, and how the
majority of Carthaginian citizens felt
about it.
With the army of Agathocles drawing near
and the last citizen defenders defeated
in the field, the Carthaginians began to
believe that their gods must be angry
with them, and at least some people in
the city believed that it was this
practice of sacrificing the children of
the poor instead of their own that was
to blame, as Diodorus of Sicily recounts.
They also alleged that Kronos had turned
against them, as in former times they had
been accustomed to sacrifice to this god
the noblest of their sons, but more
recently, secretly buying and nurturing
children, they had sent these to the
sacrifice. When they had given thought to
these things and saw their enemy encamped
before their walls, they were filled with
superstitious dread, for they believed
that they had neglected the honors of
the gods that had been established by
their fathers. In their zeal to make
amends for their omission, they selected
200 of the noblest children and
sacrificed them publicly, and others who
were under suspicion sacrificed
themselves voluntarily, in number not
less than 300.
In this time of peril, the citizens of
Carthage reverted to a kind of suicidal
religious fundamentalism, but this would
not be the end of the city.
Agathocles rampaged around the
countryside of Carthage for years,
but the city's formidable triple wall
defenses would keep him at bay, and soon
the Greek king ran out of steam.
In his absence, some of his Sicilian
vassals were taking the opportunity to
declare independence.
He hurried back home, leaving his
inexperienced son in charge of his army,
who was easily outmaneuvered by
Carthaginian generals.
By the time Agathocles returned to
Africa, he saw that the situation had
become untenable, and he fled back home
to Sicily.
But his achievements had been
significant; he had left a lasting
impression on the people of Carthage,
laid waste to their countryside,
terrified them so deeply that they had
slaughtered their own children, and
likely left them on the brink of
bankruptcy.
A peace treaty in 307 BC essentially
returned the situation to exactly how it
had been before the war started.
The example of Agathocles, of a daring
strike at the heart of your enemy right
at the moment they least expect it, was
an example that later Carthaginian
generals would remember and learn from.
But it was also an episode that
other powers in the region paid
particular attention to.
Carthage had once been considered the
region's major power, but a small Greek
army had come within a hair's breadth of
bringing it to its knees.
The historian Plutarch puts it bluntly in
the mouth of one of his characters.
For who could keep his hands off Libya
or Carthage, when that city got within
his reach, a city which Agathocles,
slipping stealthily out of Syracuse and
crossing the sea with only a few ships,
narrowly missed taking?
The first who would seek to take
advantage of this perceived weakness was
a Greek king named Pyrrhus.
Pyrrhus was the king of the Greek kingdom
of Epiros, around what is today Southern
Albania.
His name meant fiery or red-haired,
coming from the same root as the English
word pyre,
and Plutarch recalls that he seems to
have suffered from some kind of
developmental disorder that fused
together the teeth of his upper jaw,
giving him an unsettling look.
In the aspect of his countenance, Pyrrhus
had more of the terror than of the
majesty of kingly power.
He had not many teeth, but his upper jaw
was one continuous bone on which the
usual intervals between the teeth were
indicated by slight depressions.
But just like Agathocles, Pyrrhus had an
immensely high opinion of himself and
fancied himself as the inheritor of the
legacy of Alexander.
In his later life, he styled himself as a
hero of the Hellenic world, the defender
of everything Greek, and right at that
moment, the Greeks who needed the most
defending were the beleaguered colonies
in southern Italy, the region known as
Megale Hellas or Greater Greece.
These city-states were suddenly being
menaced by a powerful new force in the
region, a people from the river plains of
central Italy that the Greeks considered
to be barbarians, and that had recently
emerged as something of a regional
superpower.
This was the once small and
insignificant city-state republic of
Rome.
Throughout the 4th century BC, this
bizarre republic had begun expanding
into the hinterlands of its region of
Latium, and brought a number of other
cities under its control.
From there, they had managed to upset the
power balance of central Italy, and
toppled a number of well-established
rivals, absorbing all of Latium and the
region of Campania.
Wherever they went, the Romans took a
remarkably clever and pragmatic approach
to absorbing other peoples into their
society.
While empires like Carthage kept full
citizenship only for the people living
in their home city, Rome was far more
generous with citizenship.
Unlike the armies of Carthage, Rome's
legions were made up of citizen soldiers,
and with every free man now a citizen,
they were able to draw on vast reserves
of manpower.
As Rome grew in size and influence,
Carthage took notice.
About 160 years after the first treaty
they had signed, they penned a new
expanded agreement with Rome.
This new treaty added the condition that
Rome would not try to found any cities
in Carthaginian territory, suggesting
that Roman expansion had become at least
a small concern for the region's major
power.
But for the most part, relations between
Rome and Carthage were friendly, if
suspicious.
Carthage welcomed the rise of Rome as a
potential ally against their mutual
enemies, the Greeks, and one district of
the city of Rome was known as the Vicus
Africus, or African quarter, suggesting
that a population of Carthaginian
merchants already lived and traded in
the city.
It seems Carthage viewed Rome not as an
unwelcome rival, but as a new potential
source of customers.
But for the Greek colonies of southern
Italy, Rome was a voracious new predator.
As Roman power expanded, the Greeks found
themselves surrounded, and many of them
began sending out letters of distress to
the fiery Greek king Pyrrhus.
One of these colonies was the city of
Tarentum, as Plutarch recalls.
The Romans were at war with the people
of Tarentum, who, being able neither to
carry on the war nor put an end to it,
wish to make Pyrrhus their leader and
summon him to the war, believing him to
be a most formidable general.
Pyrrhus couldn't resist this opportunity
to position himself as the valiant
defender of Greek civilization against
these Latin barbarians.
He gathered an armada and a large army
complete with 20 war elephants, and in
the year 280 BC, he sailed to southern
Italy in full force.
Himself a sophisticated Greek, Pyrrhus
expected to meet an unruly barbarian
horde on the battlefield, but Roman
troops were by now toughened from their
long wars of expansion in Italy, and they
were already exhibiting the kind of
organization that would one day make
them famous.
When he learned that the Romans were
near and lay encamped on the further
side of the river Siris, he rode up to
the river to get a view of them; and when
he observed their discipline, the
appointment of their watches, their order,
and the general arrangement of their
camp, he was amazed, and said to the
friend that was nearest him,
ëThe discipline of these barbarians is
not barbarous.í
But these early Roman legions were still
no match for Greek phalanxes, and the
site of Pyrrhus' elephants terrified
the Roman horses.
Pyrrhus defeated the Romans in two battles,
at Heraclea and at Ausculum, in the year
279 BC, and he believed that Rome must
soon concede the war and agree to the
terms of his demands.
But slightly to the bemusement of Pyrrhus,
Rome simply refused to admit defeat.
This refusal to ever sue for peace would
become something of a Roman hallmark.
Some have argued that Rome's very nature
as a citizen democracy actually
contributed to their immense doggedness
in warfare.
Their leaders were politicians and
existed in a state of constant
competition with each other for the
support of the voting public.
Any politician who signed a damaging
peace treaty could be eviscerated in the
senate as a coward, a fool, or even a
traitor. This meant that Roman senators
would often overwhelmingly vote to
continue a war rather than admit defeat.
This will to continue, along with their
large reserves of citizen manpower, meant
that Rome could often absorb terrific
defeats, losing whole armies, and simply
keep going.
This often had the effect of simply
grinding down their enemiesí will to
fight.
According to Plutarch, who was fond of
inventing dialogue for his historical
characters, Pyrrhus made the following quip
after his third victory with Rome.
We are told that Pyrrhus said to one who
was congratulating him on his victory, ëIf
we are victorious in one more battle
with the Romans, we shall be utterly
ruined!í For he had lost great part of the
forces with which he came, and all his
friends and generals except a few;
he had no others who we could summon
from home, and he saw that his allies in
Italy were becoming indifferent, while
the army of the Romans, as if from a
fountain gushing forth indoors, was
easily and speedily filled up again.
After this series of Pyrrhic victories,
Pyrrhus soon realized the conquest of
Italy would elude him. He came within
miles of Rome, but the tall Servian walls
of the city meant that his beleaguered
force had no hope of capturing it.
Still, he couldn't bear the thought of
returning home empty-handed.
Pyrrhus decided that he would head to
Sicily and see if he could have any more
success helping the Greek colonies there
fight against the Carthaginians.
He arrived in the Greek town of Syracuse
to a hero's welcome. Every Greek colony
on the island sent troops to fill his
army, and Pyrrhus would find the
Carthaginian forces on Sicily to be a
much softer target than the legions of
Rome.
The Carthaginian response to Pyrrhus
couldn't have been more different to the
Romans.
With little desire to be dragged back
into another war in Sicily, they offered
to pay him off generously to leave them
alone, but Pyrrhus refused, as Plutarch
describes.
When the Carthaginians were inclined to
come to terms and were willing to pay
him money and send him ships, he replied
to them -- his heart being set on greater
things -- that there could be no settlement
or friendship between himself and them
unless they abandoned all Sicily.
But Sicily, too, eventually defeated him.
After years of war, his men were tired.
The Carthaginians and Romans were now
working together,
so he faced the powerful armies of Rome
on land and the vast navy of Carthage by
sea.
After finally meeting with defeat in
southern Italy, he cut his losses and
sailed for home with little to show for
his years of war.
As he sailed away, Plutarch imagines
Pyrrhus reflecting on the situation he has
left behind.
He could not master Sicily, which was
like a storm-tossed ship, but desired to
leave her, and it is said that at the
time of his departure, Pyrrhus looked back
at the island and said to those about
him, ëMy friend, what a wrestling ground
for Carthaginians and Romans we are
leaving behind us.í
Pyrrhus' campaign had ended in failure.
With him gone, Rome quickly swept over
the remaining Greek city-states of Italy,
and solidified its hold on the south of
their peninsula.
The Romans built roads connecting these
wealthy Greek cities to the Roman
network, and used the treasure they
seized to build a grand series of new
temples in the capital, as well as an
enormous second aqueduct for Rome, the
Aqua Anio Vetus.
Meanwhile, Carthage reclaimed many of the
cities that Pyrrhus had taken in Sicily,
but without a common enemy, the twin
powers of Carthage and Rome were now
butting up against each other.
By the year 270 BC, Rome had captured the
city of Rhegium, right across the Straits
of Messina.
They could now look over the water and
gazed directly at the coast of Sicily.
The wrestling ground that Pyrrhus had left
behind in Sicily would set the stage for
the next dramatic period of
Mediterranean history.
It was a stage that would see a conflict
unfold that would dwarf the Sicilian
wars for intensity and scale, that would
last for a hundred years, that would
bring both powers to the brink of
bankruptcy, and cost more than a million
lives.
This was the beginning of the Punic Wars.
The word Punic comes from Latin and is a
mutation of the Greek word Phoenike or
Phoenician, and at this time, the Romans
had come to use it to describe the
Phoenician superpower of Carthage that
sat facing them only three daysí voyage
away on the other side of the sea.
The historian Cassius Dio summarizes the
situation, as both the powers of Rome and
Carthage slid towards war.
The Carthaginians, who had long been
powerful, and the Romans, who are now
growing more rapidly stronger, kept
viewing each other with jealousy.
They were led into war partly by the
desire of continually acquiring more, and
partly also by fear.
It was a chance incident that broke
their truce and plunged them into war.
The main source for almost every aspect
of the First Punic War is the historian
Polybius, a Greek who was sent to Rome in
167 BC as a hostage.
Polybius was writing about the events of
the First Punic War a century after they
took place, but he was meticulous in his
research and traveled widely, gathering
as much first-hand knowledge and
archival material as he could, and as a
Greek, he was something of an outsider in
Rome, meaning that his portrayal of the
war is considered to be relatively
even-handed.
The story that Polybius tells begins in
the volcanic island of Sicily, where,
around the beginning of the 3rd century
BC, trouble was once again threatening to
erupt.
At this time, Sicily had something of the
Wild West about it.
Large parts of it were lawless and fell
between the influences of Carthage and
the Greeks.
Both sides often used mercenaries to
fight for them,
but when a particular war was finished,
it wasn't always so easy to get rid of
these bands of rough and violent men.
One such band were a group of mostly
southern Italians who called themselves
the Mamertines, or the Sons of Mars, the
Roman god of war.
In the past, they had been hired by
Agathocles to fight Carthage in
Sicily, but when the tyrant of Syracuse
had died, they found themselves out of
work.
The Mamertines wandered the island for
some time, likely engaging in theft and
petty banditry to survive, until they
reached the walled Greek town of Messina.
Messina was a small settlement on the
northeastern tip of Sicily, with the
shadow of Mount Etna looming over the
horizon, and its location was of great
strategic importance. That's because
Messina was one side of the narrowest
crossing point between Sicily and Italy.
Standing on the shore there, you can see
the Italian mainland just over the water,
and a ship could make the crossing in
under thirty minutes.
Anyone who controlled Messina would also
control this crossing, and this meant
that both Carthage and Rome were anxious
about the city's future.
When the band of Mamertines arrived in
Messina, they must have made quite a
sorry sight, and the people of the city
originally took pity on them. They took
them in and even gave them shelter in
their own homes,
but soon these hired swords became
restless and jealous of the people's
comfortable lives.
In fact, they began to plot to seize the
city for themselves.
Polybius recounts what happened next.
Certain Campanians serving under
Agathocles had long cast covetous eyes
on the beauty and prosperity of Messina,
and they availed themselves of the first
opportunity to capture it by treachery.
After being admitted as friends and
occupying the city, they first expelled
or massacred the citizens, and then took
possession of the wives and families of
the dispossessed victims.
They next divided among themselves the
land and all other property.
For the next twenty years or so, the
Mamertines would run Messina as a kind of
pirate fortress.
They would use it as a base to conduct
raids on nearby towns and villages, and
to rob ships that sailed through the
narrow straits.
But soon, the last remaining Greek king
in Sicily, a king of Syracuse named Hiero,
had had enough.
In the year 265 BC, he moved to attack
the city of Messina to stamp out these
troublesome pirates.
Fearing execution for their crimes, the
Mamertines played the only card left to
them; trading on the strategic importance
of the city. They sent out requests for
help to both of the big players in the
region, to Rome and to Carthage.
The Carthaginians, being closer, came to
their help first, delighted as always to
kick sand in the face of the Greeks.
They moved a small army into Messina and
helped the Mamertines to defend it.
This was just the latest move in the
nearly two-century chess game between
Carthage and the Greeks of Sicily, but to
the Romans, it was a worrying move.
With control of the crossing over to
Italy, the Romans began to fear that
Carthage was plotting an invasion of the
mainland, as Polybius recalls.
The Romans saw all this and felt that it
was absolutely necessary not to let
Messina slip or allow the Carthaginians
to secure what would be like a bridge to
enable them to cross into Italy.
The Roman senate was bitterly divided on
what to do, with many expressing disgust
at coming to the aid of what amounted to
a band of pirates,
but eventually their fears won out.
They voted to send a force to Messina to
secure the crossing led by a consul
named Appius Claudius.
Rome was an inland city situated on the
river Tiber, and so, the Romans were not a
naturally seagoing people.
With few ships of their own, they
borrowed as many as they could from the
coastal cities of southern Italy.
When they first took in hand to send
troops across to Messina, they not only
had no decked vessels, but no warships at
all, not so much as a single galley, but
they borrowed quinqueremes and triremes
from Tarentum and Locri, and even from
Elea and Neapolis.
The Romans, under the command of Appius,
successfully made the short crossing in
264 BC, catching the powerful
Carthaginian navy off guard.
When they arrived in Messina, the Italian
Mamertines ousted the Carthaginians who
had come to their aid, and welcomed the
Roman army into the town in their place.
The Roman capture of Messina immediately
shifted the balance of power in Sicily.
The Greeks of Syracuse formed a hasty
alliance with their ancient enemies in
Carthage, overturning two centuries of
war to repel this new invader, but it was
no good.
The Roman commander Appius descended on
Syracuse with lightning speed, as
Polybius writes.
Having succeeded in engaging the enemy,
thenceforth he scoured the territory of
Syracuse and her allies with impunity,
and laid it waste without finding anyone
to dispute the possession of the open
country with him, and finally he sat down
before Syracuse itself and laid siege to
it.
King Hiero saw no other way out.
He surrendered,
switched sides, and swore allegiance to
the Romans.
This was the end of the last independent
Greek states in Italy and Sicily, and the
future of the Mediterranean would now be
decided by either Carthage or Rome.
Both sides now marched to war.
In this First Punic War, the
Carthaginians were clearly concerned.
They drew up a large army of Celts,
Iberians, and other peoples, and
dispatched it to Sicily, but they were
also confident in their overall strategy,
which had served them well in previous
Sicilian wars.
While the warships of Carthage commanded
the waves, their trading empire would
continue to fill their treasury with
gold, and that meant there would always
be soldiers ready to fight for them.
At first, it seemed the Romans had no
hope of changing this situation; they had
virtually no navy, and their own
shipbuilding technology lagged behind,
perhaps by centuries,
as the historian Polybius writes.
Yet, so long as the Carthaginians were an
undisturbed command of the sea, the
balance of success could not incline
decisively in their favor, so they took
upon themselves there and then to meet
the Carthaginians at sea, on which they
had for generations held undisputed
supremacy.
The Carthaginian navy benefited from a
thousand years of Phoenician
shipbuilding and sailing tradition, but
their centuries of relatively
unchallenged dominance of the sea had
also made them somewhat complacent.
Their method of fighting on the water
was based mostly on the use of heavy
bronze rams fixed to the front of their
ships.
The Phoenician sailors relied on
outmaneuvering their enemies on the
waves with their superior sailing,
drawing close with their oars, and
crashing into the sides of enemy ships
with these rams, striking them in the
hulls below the water line.
It was a method of warfare that had
remained unchanged for the last 500
years, and the Carthaginians were among
the best in the world at this tricky way
of fighting.
But soon, the Romans would come across a
stroke of good luck.
After one skirmish on the sea, a
Carthaginian galley had run aground on
the shores of Italy.
It was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity
to learn what made the Carthaginian navy
so effective.
The Romans rushed to secure the vessel,
to haul it away and study its secrets, as
Polybius records.
The Carthaginians, having put to sea in
the strait to attack, a decked vessel of
theirs charged so furiously that it ran
aground, and, falling into the hands of
the Romans, served them as a model on
which they constructed their whole fleet.
If this had not happened, it is clear
that they would have been completely
hindered from carrying out their design.
What the Romans found on this vessel
would have intrigued and excited them.
At that time, the Carthaginians were
legendary not just for their sailing and
the size of their fleet, but also how
quickly they could build ships.
The writer Pliny the Elder recounts what
was possible in those days.
Piso relates that 220 ships were wholly
constructed in 45 days;
in the Second Punic War, too, the fleet was
at sea the fortieth day after the axe had
been put to the tree.
This was long considered to be an
exaggeration by ancient writers, but the
discovery of the Phoenician shipwreck,
known as the Marsala ship, has thrown
light on how this kind of mass-
-manufacture could actually have been
possible.
When the wreck was discovered,
archaeologists found that the ship had
each section of its hull marked with
certain Phoenician letters.
It's thought that these sections would
have been built separately, mass-produced
in separate factories, and then brought
together in their final location, with a
level of coordination that would not be
seen again before the Industrial
Revolution.
These ships were a kind of ancient
flatpack furniture.
Armed with this new knowledge, the Romans
began the process of copying the
Carthaginian ship exactly, but they
didn't do very well.
In their first engagement with Carthage,
the inferior mobility of these Roman
ships and the inexperience of their
sailors meant that a squadron of 17
Roman vessels was destroyed, easily
outmaneuvered by the Phoenicians, and
dealt death blows by their rams.
Following this, the Romans began to
change their tactics.
Getting the hang of the complicated
business of outmaneuvering and ramming
enemy ships would take too long, and so,
they tried to bring the battles at sea
into more familiar territory.
To do this, they developed an ingenious
new technology.
It was a kind of boarding bridge that
they called a corvus, the Latin word for
crow.
These were raised like a drawbridge at
the front of the ship, and when they drew
near to an enemy vessel, these gangplanks
would have dropped down onto the enemy
deck, where a metal spike on the
underside would drive its way into the
wood.
These bridges would now hold the two
ships together, neutralizing the speed
and agility of the Carthaginian vessels,
preventing them from ramming, and
allowing the Roman legionaries to flood
on board.
It was a crude but surprisingly
effective tactic.
The Romans kept their new inventions
hidden, and now with a secret naval
weapon of their own, they risked a
large-scale confrontation on the sea.
The Carthaginian fleet was busy
plundering at a place called Mylae, on
the coast of northern Sicily, when they
saw the Roman sails on the horizon.
They were delighted that their enemies
had finally risked a battle, and were
supremely confident of sending the whole
fleet of this troublesome Italian power
straight to the bottom of the ocean.
Polybius recounts what happened next.
No sooner did the Carthaginians sight him
than with joy they put to sea with 130
sail, feeling supreme contempt for the
Roman ignorance of seamanship.
Accordingly, they all sailed with their
prows directed straight at their enemy;
they did not think the engagement worth
even the trouble of ranging their ships
in any order. When they neared the enemy,
they saw the crows raised aloft on the
prows of several ships. The
Carthaginians were, for a time, in a state
of perplexity, for they were quite
strangers to such contrivances as these
engines. Feeling, however, a complete
contempt for their opponent, they charged
without flinching, but as soon as they
came to close quarters, their ships were
invariably tightly grappled by these
machines. The enemy boarded by means of
the crows and engaged them on their
decks, and in the end, some of the
Carthaginians were cut down, while others
surrendered in bewildered terror at the
battle in which they found themselves
engaged, which eventually became exactly
like a land fight. Eventually, the
Carthaginians turned and fled, bewildered at
the novelty of the occurrence, and with a
loss of fifty ships.
For Carthage, this was an utter disaster.
Flying high from their successes, the
Romans soon organized invasions of the
islands of Sardinia and Corsica,
Carthaginian possessions for centuries
that had never been seriously threatened.
They even organized an invasion of North
Africa itself, hoping to follow in the
footsteps of Agathocles and march on
the capital of Carthage.
For the Carthaginians, things were
starting to get out of hand.
As the Roman invasion force descended
upon the coast, Carthage sent out the
entirety of its fleet to meet them on
the open sea.
Polybius recounts that as they sighted the
Roman sails on the horizon, the
commanders of Carthage spoke to their
sailors and soldiers, and vocalized a
fear that must have been on the lips of
every man and woman in the Phoenician
territories, that this war was now in
danger of coming home.
Meanwhile, the Carthaginian commanders
had briefly addressed their men.
They pointed out to them that victory in
this battle would ensure that the war in
the future was confined to the question
of the possession of Sicily, while if
they were beaten, they would have
hereafter to fight for their native land
and for all that they held dear.
Polybius records that more than 600
ships came together in the battle that
ensued. By the time he was writing his
history of the Punic Wars more than a
hundred years later, the size of warships
had dramatically increased, and so, he
likely wildly overestimates the number
of men involved, putting it at well over
300,000. Nevertheless, the
battle was enormous and probably
involved at least 120,000 sailors,
soldiers, rowers, and marines.
The vast battlefield would have devolved
into a chaos of clashing oars and rams,
shouting men, and the thud of the corvus
bridges crushing down onto the decks, the
clashing of shields and swords, the
crashing of waves, and the shrieking of
gulls overhead.
By the end of the day, the result of the
battle was a decisive defeat for the
Carthaginians.
With the fleet of Carthage scattered, the
Romans successfully made the crossing
into Africa and landed on the peninsula
of Cape Bon, on the other side of the
bay from the city.
The citizens of Carthage would now have
been able to see the campfires of the
Roman army in the distance at night.
Some of the city's oldest residents
would still have remembered when the
army of Agathocles had menaced the city
only half a century before, when they had
watched those ships burning on the
shoreline.
The Carthaginians had had enough.
They asked the Romans for a peace treaty
to sign, but the Roman demands were so
punishing that the Carthaginians, even in
their desperate state, could not accept
it, and so, the war dragged on.
But the Romans, like Agathocles, found
themselves unable to take the city of
Carthage.
The Roman expeditionary force sent to
capture the city was beaten disastrously
by a smaller Carthaginian army at the
battle of Tunis, and the Roman consul
leading it was captured and killed.
In this way, the fortunes of each side
ticked back and forth like a pendulum.
Another naval battle at Cape Hermaeum saw
another Roman victory and another
hundred Carthaginian ships sunk, but the
Romans had no time to celebrate.
On its return voyage home, the victorious
Roman fleet was hit by a devastating
storm, as Polybius records.
The disaster was indeed extreme, for out
of their 364 vessels, 80 only remained.
The rest were either swamped or driven
by the surf upon the rocks and headlands,
where they went to pieces and filled all
the seaboard with corpses and wreckage.
No greater catastrophe is to be found in
all history as befalling a fleet at one
time.
284 ships were lost, with an estimated
60,000 sailors sinking to the bottom of the
sea.
It was among the worst naval disasters
in history.
Some historians have speculated that the
Romansí secret weapon, the corvus boarding
bridges, may have actually made their
ships top-heavy and prone to capsizing
in stormy conditions.
After this disaster, there are no
mentions of the corvus ever being used
again on Roman ships.
The war would drag on for another 14
years, with most of the fighting taking
place in Sicily and the surrounding seas,
but by the year 241 BC, Carthage was
spent.
The Carthaginian senate ordered their
general in Sicily to sign whatever peace
treaty the Romans demanded, no matter how
punishing.
This general was a man named Hamilcar
Barca. He was proud, a competent general,
and he had been winning some of his
battles in Sicily. He believed that
signing such a punishing treaty was
madness, and so, he refused the order to
negotiate.
In his place, the senate sent a more
junior commander to capitulate to Rome.
The First Punic War ended in the year
241 BC, 23 years after it had begun, with
the signing of the Treaty of Lutatius.
It was one of the longest continuous
wars to ever take place in the ancient
world.
It had exhausted both Rome and Carthage,
and driven them both to the brink of
bankruptcy.
But Rome, as the victor, had at least
gained something from all the years of
carnage.
Under the terms of the treaty, Carthage
was forced to give up all its remaining
territory in Sicily to Rome, and possibly
the island of Corsica, too.
Carthage was forced to release all Roman
prisoners without ransom, while hefty
ransoms were charged for any
Carthaginian held by Rome,
and they were forced to pay a staggering
82 tons of silver in reparations to Rome
over the next ten years.
All of this meant that Carthage could no
longer afford to pay its armies.
Many of these were foreign mercenaries
that it was already in debt to, and in
the same year as the treaty was signed, a
large band of these mercenaries, around
20,000 men or so, camped outside
the city itself and refused to budge
until they got paid.
But the state was all but bankrupt.
When the Carthaginian senate delayed in
paying them, they mutinied and began
looting and burning the countryside.
While the two decades of war had been
tough on the citizens of Carthage, it had
been even tougher on the rural regions
of Africa it ruled over.
Carthaginian provinces like Libya had
sent huge numbers of men to fight for
Carthage, and they were subjected to
punishing taxes to pay for it all.
Their resentment had been slowly
building, and now it boiled over.
When news of this army of rioting
mercenaries reached some of these
discontented cities, they saw their
chance to free themselves of the rule of
Carthage entirely.
Many of them rebelled, and soon Carthage
was engulfed in a civil war.
It looked for the first time like the
entire empire might come apart at the
seams, as Polybius writes.
For three years and about four months
did the Mercenaries maintain a war
against the Carthaginians, which far
surpassed any that I have heard of for
cruelty and inhumanity.
The many battles in which they have been
engaged at sea have naturally left them
ill-supplied with arms, sailors, and
vessels. They had no store of provisions
ready and no expectation whatever of
external assistance from friends or
allies.
They were indeed now thoroughly taught
the difference between a foreign war
carried on beyond the seas and the
domestic insurrection.
The civil war that followed, which would
become known as the Mercenary War, would
unfold with unparalleled brutality.
The bodies of crucified rebels would
have become a regular sight along the
roads. The instability caused a famine,
and Carthage was forced to raise an army
from its citizens, forcing ordinary
people in the capital to fight.
The man tasked by the Carthaginian
senate with carrying out this civil war
was the proud general Hamilcar Barca,
the man who had refused to sign the
treaty with Rome.
Throughout these years of violence, he
would have seen his homeland burning, his
people starving and dying, and all this
time, he nursed his hatred for his Roman
enemies.
At enormous cost, Hamilcar Barca would
eventually crush the rebels, and he
sometimes did this quite literally.
Many insurgents captured in the later
years of the war were executed beneath
the feet of Carthage's elephants, the
ultimate living symbol of the empire's
power.
After four years of civil war, some
measure of order returned to the
scorched countryside.
The empire of Carthage had survived, but
they were now in an even worse state
than before.
Meanwhile, the Romans had spent four
years recovering and drawing wealth from
their new lands in Sicily and Corsica. At
Carthage's time of weakness, Rome moved
to capture the island of Sardinia, too,
which had escaped its grasp during the
war and was now rebelling against
Carthage's weakened rule.
The Carthaginians could do nothing to
stop them, as Polybius recalls.
When the Carthaginians expressed
indignation of this on the ground that
the lordship over Sardinia more properly
belonged to them, the Romans voted to
declare war against them. The
Carthaginians, however, having just had an
almost miraculous escape from
annihilation in the recent civil war,
yielded to the necessities of the hour
and not only abandoned Sardinia, but they
paid the Romans 1,200 talents into the
bargain that they might not be obliged
to undertake the war for the present. The
new balance of power in the
Mediterranean was clear. Carthage was now
a hollowed-out husk.
If they were to reclaim any of the power
that they had once held, the next
generation of Carthaginian military
leaders would need to produce a general
of such genius that he could turn around
the hopes and fortunes of this
floundering empire,
a general that would conduct a campaign
so daring that it is still studied in
military academies to this day.
That man would bear a name that in
Phoenician meant ëby the grace of Baalí.
His name was Hannibal.
Hannibal
was the son of the general Hamilcar
Barca.
When the First Punic War ended, he was a
boy of only six years old, and he would
have watched with the formative mind of
a child as the world he knew was torn
apart by violence, and his father
struggled to end the rebellions.
When Rome had snatched away the island
of Sardinia, Carthage lost the last of
its profitable central Mediterranean
islands, and with the empire so weakened,
its economy was in freefall.
If it was to right itself, Carthage would
need to find vast resources of minerals,
metals, and people,
and Hannibal's father knew that the only
way these could be found was by
expanding Carthage's last remaining
overseas territories.
These were in southern Spain, as Polybius
writes. Hamilcar,
with the anger felt by all his
compatriots at this last outrage, as soon
as he had finally crushed the mutiny of
mercenaries and secured the safety of
his country, at once threw all his
efforts into the conquest of Spain.
Hamilcar gathered an army and set out for
the Spanish colonies.
Rome now ruled the seas, and Carthage's
navy was so weakened that he was unable
to travel the whole way to Spain by ship.
Instead, he had to march all the way
across North Africa and ferry his army
across the sea at the narrow Straits of
Gibraltar.
When he left,
he took his own young son Hannibal with
him to teach the boy the art of war and
to ensure that he passed on his burning
hatred for Rome.
At the time, when his father was about to
start with his army on his expedition to
Spain, Hannibal, then nine years of age,
were standing by the altar while
Hamilcar was sacrificing to Zeus.
His father took him by the hand, led him
up to the altar, and bade him lay his
hand on the victim and swear never to be
the friend of the Romans. He made his own
son Hannibal such an enemy of Rome that
none could be more bitter.
Despite the weakened state of Carthage,
Hamilcar succeeded in conquering the
Celtic tribes of Spain. He built a new
city there that became known as New
Carthage, now the southern Spanish city
of Cartagena.
While the young boy Hannibal grew up in
Spain, he would have likely visited the
Temple of Melqart or Hercules in Gades,
that temple with the golden olive tree
at its center.
He would have heard stories about
Hercules and his legendary journey over
the Alps, herding the cattle of Geryon,
the giant.
Perhaps he would have even learned the
history of the Greek, Agathocles, and
his daring strike right at the heart of
his stronger enemy. All this while, he
would have dreamed of one day making his
own mark on history.
When his father Hamilcar died and his
successor was assassinated, it would soon
fall to the young Hannibal to lead the
Carthaginian armies in Spain.
He continued his father's work of
expanding their territories, pushing back
the local Celtic tribes who opposed him,
and it's clear he developed a flare for
warfare.
By the time he was 27, Hannibal
controlled more than half of the Iberian
Peninsula, a vast and wealthy territory
of nearly a quarter-million square
kilometers.
From his father, he had inherited an army
of 60,000 battle-hardened troops,
the best in the empire, and a stable of
200 war elephants.
He had also forged alliances with a
number of Celtic tribes in Spain that he
knew would come to his aid if needed.
He was now at the head of the wealthiest
and most powerful province of the empire.
Hannibal and his father's success in
Spain restored the lifeblood of Carthage,
and silver once again flowed through the
empire.
It's said that just one Spanish mine in
the region of Baebelo, with its shafts
running more than two kilometers into
the mountainside, was producing nearly a
thousand kilograms of silver each week
for Hannibal's treasury.
Analysis shows that the coins being
minted in Spain at this time were of an
exceptionally high content of silver,
while those being minted back in
Carthage were still watered down with
cheaper metals.
All of this meant that Hannibal was
beginning to feel increasingly confident
about testing the bounds of what he
could get away with, both with the Senate
back in Carthage and with his sworn
enemy of Rome.
The Roman poet Silius Italicus gives one
description of his character.
He was one, by nature, eager for action,
yet an oath-breaker, cunning beyond all,
though of questionable fairness. Armed, he
was no respecter of the gods; bold to do
wrong, scorning the virtues of peace, and
with a thirst for human blood alive in
his deepest marrow. Above all, in the
flower of his youth, he longed to erase
that defeat, a generation's shame, and
drown their peace treaty deep in the
Sicilian Sea.
The location for the flashpoint that
would spark the Second Punic War was the
town of Saguntum, just north of what is
today Valencia in southern Spain.
Saguntum was a Roman ally, and Rome had
been watching with concern as Carthage's
Spanish borders edged ever closer.
Rome had made it very clear that they
would not tolerate a Carthaginian attack
on the city of Saguntum,
but Hannibal was willing to call their
bluff.
In the year 219 BC, at the age of 28, he
led his army against the city and put it
under siege.
The fighting didn't go smoothly; the
people of Saguntum put up a fierce
defense from their walls, and Hannibal
was even wounded in the thigh by a
javelin, but his move to take the city
was a clear spit in the eye of the
Romans.
When they heard about what was happening,
Rome dispatched some envoys who turned
up at Hannibal's siege camp at Saguntum
and demanded to speak with him.
He had his man send them away, telling
them that he was too busy to talk to
them.
The Romans must have left seething with
rage.
Back in Carthage, news of Hannibal's
actions were likely met with excitement
by his supporters and with a frenzy of
dismay by others.
One of his great opponents, a man named
Hanno, is supposed to have delivered a
blistering speech against him in the
Carthaginian senate, the words of which
the later Roman historian Livy imagines.
As long as any single representative of
the blood and name of Barca survives,
our treaty with Rome will never remain
unimperilled. You have sent to the army, as
though supplying fuel to fire, a young
man who is consumed with a passion for
sovereign power, and who recognizes that
the only way to it lies in passing his
life surrounded by armed legions and
perpetually stirring up fresh wars. It is
against Carthage that Hannibal is now
bringing up his towers. It is Carthage
whose walls he is shaking with his
battering rams. The ruins of Saguntum
will fall on our heads, and the war which
has begun with Saguntum will have to be
carried on with Rome.
But Hannibal also had plenty of
supporters, and even his strongest
opponents in the senate found themselves
in something of a bind.
Many would have likely preferred to have
Hannibal arrested and his armies given
to some more predictable general, but in
truth, they had no idea how to do this.
Hannibalís soldiers were loyal to him, and
any move against him would cause a civil
war that could lose Carthage all of the
wealthy Spanish provinces on which their
entire economy now rested.
But the Romans, too, were paralyzed by
indecision. For the eight months of the
siege of Saguntum, Rome did nothing but
complain.
When Hannibal finally took the city, the
Romans sent a delegation of ambassadors
to Africa to demand an explanation.
The clouds of war were once again
gathering over the sea.
When these men arrived, they spoke before
the Carthaginian senate and demanded to
know whether Hannibal's capture of
Saguntum was the official policy of
Carthage or just the work of one rogue
general.
If he had acted alone, they demanded that
Hannibal be arrested and handed over for
punishment. If Carthage failed to do that,
Rome would declare war.
The historian Appian described this
moment as the Carthaginian senate made
its choice.
The Romans now sent ambassadors to
Carthage to demand that Hannibal should
be delivered up to them as a violator of
the treaty. If they would not give him up,
war was to be declared forthwith.
The chief of the embassy pointed to the
fold of his toga and, smiling, said, ëHere,
Carthaginians, I bring you peace or war.
You may take whichever you choose.í The
latter replied, ëYou may give us whichever
you like.í
When the Romans offered war, they all
cried out, ëWe accept it.í
The poet Silius Italicus, writing some
centuries after the conflict, gives an
even more florid rendition.
He gestured to them that he carried war
and peace in his hands, demanding they
choose, and when the senators refused to
accept either, he replied, shaking his
robes as if pouring out battle and ruin
from his arms; ëTake war, unhappy Libya,
with an outcome like the first.í
The Roman historian Livy describes the
conflict that ensued in the following
terms.
The most memorable of all wars ever
waged, the war that is, which, under the
leadership of Hannibal, the Carthaginians
waged with the Roman people, for neither
have states or nations met in arms
possessed of ample resources,
nor was their own might and power ever
so great.
Growing up among the fires of civil war,
Hannibal had learned never to let your
homeland become a battlefield. He knew
that if he waited in Spain, his lands
would soon become host to a Roman
invasion force. His fields would burn. His
silver mines would dry up, and his people
would suffer.
So, he decided to take his war to
Rome.
He withdrew to his capital of New
Carthage for the winter, to prepare and
plan, and here, Livy describes him giving
the following speech to his soldiers.
You are on the eve of an expedition that
will carry you far afield, and it is
uncertain when you will see again your
homes. With the first signs of spring,
with Heavenís good help, we may begin a
war that shall bring us vast renown and
treasure.
The journey from New Carthage to Italy
was one of about 1,500 kilometers, so
Hannibal knew that a long and dangerous
march awaited him once the spring
arrived,
and at the end of this journey, a
monumental problem loomed ahead of him.
That's because the geography of the
Italian Peninsula made it something of a
natural fortress.
Beginning in the Cretaceous Period
around 100 million years ago, the steady
northward movement of the African
continental plate crushing beneath the
Eurasian plate in the region of Sicily
had caused the Earth's crust to bend and
pleat, driving up a dramatic series of
mountains that form a sheer wall between
the Italian Peninsula and Celtic Western
Europe, which the Romans called Gaul.
These mountains, known as the Alps, can
tower up to five kilometers from sea
level, with permanent snow-capped peaks
choked with icy glaciers, and with only a
few narrow crossing points.
The Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus
describes the appearance of the Alps at
this time.
This country of Gaul, because of its
lofty chains of mountains always covered
with formidable snows, was formerly all
but unknown to the inhabitants of the
rest of the globe, except where it
borders on the coast; and mountain
bulwarks enclose it on every side,
surrounding it naturally, as if by the
art of man.
The most commonly-used roads were the
ones that went around this natural wall,
the narrow corridor that follows the
coastline past what is now the French
port town of Nice.
But as the only way into and out of
Italy, these roads were heavily defended
and lined with forts stacked with Roman
legionaries.
Here, the Romans could have staged a
fearsome defense.
Faced with this problem, Hannibal would
need a daring solution,
and it's here that those stories may
have come back to him, stories he must
have heard as a child of the great hero
Hercules leading his herd of cattle
directly over the Alps.
The Romans believed that it was
impossible to cross the Alps with an
army weighed down with supplies, with
horses, oxen, and with a herd of 37
elephants.
It would be madness to even attempt it,
and for that reason, it was the last
thing they would ever have expected.
When spring came and the Romans heard of
the Carthaginian army beginning its
march, they sent ambassadors along the
coastal roads and into what they called
Transalpine Gaul. There were Celtic
tribes of Gauls living on both the
Italian and the northern side of the
Alps, and so, the Romans used the Latin
word cis, meaning ëon this sideí and trans,
meaning ëon the other sideí, to
differentiate between them. The Roman
ambassadors approached the leaders of
these Transalpine Gauls, and informed
them of the Carthaginian army then
making its way towards them.
They asked these Gauls to bar the way
to Hannibal and his troops, but they
didn't get the reception they'd hoped
for, as Livy describes.
When the envoys, boasting of the renown
and valor of the Roman people and the
extent of their dominion, requested the
Gauls to deny the Phoenician a passage
through their lands and cities, if he
should attempt to carry the war into
Italy, it is said that they burst out
into such peals of laughter that the
magistrates and elders could scarce
reduce the younger men to order.
So stupid and impudent a thing, it seemed,
to propose that the Gauls should bring
down the war on their own heads and
offer their own fields to be pillaged in
place of other men's.
This was perhaps the first sign that
things weren't going to go as the Romans
might have wished.
But on his march south, Hannibal did
encounter significant resistance from
local peoples who didn't welcome the
presence of his army,
and in France, it was only through the
excessive distribution of gifts that the
Gauls allowed him and his men to pass.
The first true obstacle was the river
Rhone, one of France's largest rivers.
Here, Hannibal's army crossed with
difficulty, building rafts to ferry his
men and equipment across,
but the elephants here posed a
significant challenge.
These animals were terrified of water,
and so, to get them across, the
Carthaginians built enormous rafts built
from whole tree trunks and covered them
with earth and turf so that the
elephants would believe they were still
standing on dry land.
In that way, they were able to coax two
of the females onto the rafts and across
the river,
and from there, the rest of the herd were
ferried across.
Hannibal then followed the river road
north and found a tribe of Gauls who
agreed to help him achieve his
impossible plan;
to cross the vast natural barrier of the
Alps.
These Gauls gave Hannibal and his men
supplies and warm clothing for the
mountain crossing, but the task ahead was
still staggering.
By this time, it was October. Winter was
closing in, and the passes of the Alps
were choked with ice and snow.
The later Roman writer Ammianus
Marcellinus writes one account of these
treacherous alpine passes.
In these Alps, there rises a lofty
ridge which scarcely anyone can cross
without danger,
for as one comes from Gaul, it falls off
with sheer incline,
terrible to look upon because of
overhanging cliffs on either side;
then over precipitous ravines on either
side and chasms rendered treacherous
through the accumulation of ice, men and
animals descending with hesitating steps
slide forward, and wagons as well.
In winter, the ground, caked with ice, and
as if it were polished and therefore
slippery, drives men headlong in their
gait, and the spreading valleys, made
treacherous by ice, sometimes swallow up
the traveler.
The march to the top of the pass took
nine days, and we can only imagine the
hardship that these men, their horses and
oxen, and elephants all endured during
those days,
but on the ninth day, they reached the
top,
and now gazed down through the Alpine
pass into the green lowlands of Italy
stretching out below them.
But the descent from the mountains would
prove to be even more treacherous than
the climb.
On their way down, they found that a
recent landslide had turned what was
already a difficult road into an
unpassable precipice.
The historian Livy describes the
obstacle that faced them.
The result was a horrible struggle, the
ice affording no foothold in any case, at
least of all on a steep slope.
When a man tried by hands or knees to
get on his feet again, even those useless
supports slipped from under him and let
him down.
There were no stumps or roots anywhere
to afford a purchase to either hand or
foot; in short, there was nothing for it
but to roll and slither on the smooth
ice and melting snow.
The decision was made to cut a stepped
path into this sheer wall, and the episode
has become one of the most famous in the
mythical retelling of these events that
would take place over the next centuries.
The story goes that Hannibal ordered his
men to gather large amounts of wood and
build a great fire against the rock of
the precipice.
As the fire blazed and the flames licked
at the icy stone, the rock heated up,
then the soldiers would pour their
rations of sour wine against the heated
rock, causing its temperature to rapidly
drop and the rock to crack. With iron
tools, they then worked away at these
fissures until after four days of labor,
steps were cut into the rock, as Livy
recounts.
After thus heating the crag with fire,
they opened a way in it with iron tools
and relieved the steepness of the slope
with zigzags of an easy gradient,
so that not only the baggage animals but
even the elephants could be led down.
Four days were consumed at the cliff, and
the animals nearly perished of
starvation,
for the mountaintops are all
practically bare, and such grass as does
grow is buried under snow.
Whether this episode unfolded quite in
this manner or not, from the perspective
of Hannibal's followers, the purpose of
telling this story was clear; here was a
new Hercules, it said, a man who has
crossed the Alps with his herd of
elephants, a man who achieves great
labors wherever he goes, a man for whom
the very rock of the mountain presents
no obstacle.
Climbing down into the foothills, the men
must have felt the lowland warmth wash
over their skin for the first time with
a sense of enormous relief, as Livy
recounts.
Lower down one comes to valleys and
sunny slopes and rivulets, and near them
woods and places that begin to be fitted
for man's habitation. There the beasts
were turned out to graze, and the men,
exhausted with toiling at the road, were
allowed to rest.
But the audacity of Hannibal's plan had
come at a cost,
as Polybius writes.
When Hannibal crossed the Rhone, he had
38,000 infantry and more than 8,000
cavalry. He lost nearly half in the pass;
while the survivors had, by these long
continued sufferings, become almost
savage in look and general appearance.
Nevertheless, Hannibal and his men now
stood and looked out over the lands of
Italy below.
They had caught the Romans completely by
surprise.
At the outbreak of war with Carthage,
Rome knew that Hannibal's army was on
the move.
They sent out messengers to find out any
word about the location of his forces,
but recently they had been coming back
empty-handed.
After crossing the river Rhone, the
Carthaginian general had disappeared.
He wasn't in Gaul. He wasn't in Spain. For
the Romans, the situation must have been
puzzling and a little concerning.
When news came to them of what Hannibal
had done, the first note of panic began
to set in.
Polybius recounted the reaction of one
Roman general.
Publius had not expected that Hannibal would
even attempt the passage of the Alps, or
if he did attempt it, that he could
escape utter destruction.
He was immensely astonished at his courage
and adventurous daring when he heard that he
had not only got safe across, but was
actually besieging certain towns in
Italy.
The Roman government was typically slow-
-moving, and the speed of Hannibal's
attack had stunned them.
Scarcely had the last rumor about the
taking of Saguntum by the Carthaginians
ceased to attract attention, then news came
that Hannibal had arrived in Italy with
his army.
What made matters worse was that
Hannibal was now recruiting allies from
the Cisalpine Gauls in the foothills of
the Alps, Celtic tribes on the Italian
side of the mountains who had fought with
the Romans before.
The Roman senate went into a panic. They
brought up reinforcements from Sicily,
from an army that at that moment had
been preparing to invade Africa.
The general Sempronius Longus led this
army of more than 40,000 to intercept
Hannibal's forces in northern Italy. They
met at the battle of Trebia in December
of the year 218 BC.
Here, Hannibal's powerful and
determined forces utterly smashed the
Roman army, killing at least 20,000
soldiers.
When news of this defeat reached Rome,
the mood in the senate must have been
bleak.
Hannibal marched south and crossed the
Apennine mountains that run down the
center of Italy, and crushed another
Roman army on the shore of Lake
Trasimene, killing another 15,000 Romans
and capturing 10,000 prisoners.
From there, his march seemed to be
unstoppable.
Hannibal would rampage across Italy for
a total of fifteen years.
Chastened by their defeats, the Romans
now avoided any battles with him, trying
instead to suffocate his army and cut
off his supplies.
They even resorted to a scorched-earth
campaign in which they burned their own
countryside in a desperate attempt to
starve Hannibal's troops.
Hannibal's strategy was to march south,
hoping that the conquered Greek cities
of southern Italy would greet him as a
liberator and throw off the rule of
their Roman masters, but the journey was
hard. On his way, all but the largest of
his elephants would die as a result of
the harsh Italian winter, and while
riding through the marshes of central
Italy, Hannibal himself caught an
infection that caused the loss of one of
his eyes.
When he reached southern Italy, he seized
a vast supply depot at the town of Cannae,
and the Roman senate realized their
strategy of suffocating him wouldn't
work.
They ordered a vast army to be drawn up,
86,000 soldiers, the largest that had
ever been raised in Roman history, and
with this force, they sent the best and
brightest of Roman society to march
south to meet Hannibal at Cannae.
Hannibal, now frustrated with these
months without a battle, was all too
eager to accept.
Once again, the Roman army was utterly
smashed, and the defeat was so total that
even high members of Roman society were
slaughtered on the battlefield.
Livy describes the aftermath.
It is said that 45,500
foot and 2,700 horse was slain, in an
almost equal proportion of citizens and
allies.
In the number were the quaestors of both
consuls and 29 military tribunes, some
of consular rank, some of praetorian; and
besides these, 80 senators, all men who had
held offices which would have given
them the right to be elected to the
senate, but had volunteered to serve as
soldiers in the legions. The prisoners
taken in this battle are said to have
numbered 3,000 foot soldiers
and 1,500 horsemen.
When news of this staggering defeat
reached Rome, the city went into a panic.
The people of Rome began seeing evil
omens and portents everywhere. One
senator was dispatched to Greece to
consult the oracle at Delphi,
and as the Carthaginians had once done
under threat by Agathocles, the Romans
resorted to rituals of human sacrifice
to appease their angry gods, as Livy
describes.
By the direction of the Books of Fate,
some unusual sacrifices were offered;
amongst others, a Gaulish man and woman
and a Greek man and woman were buried
alive in the cattle market, in a place
walled in with stone, which even before
this time had been defiled with human
victims,
a sacrifice wholly alien to the Roman
spirit.
To raise a new army, the Romans reduced
the age of boys that were allowed to
serve in the military to 17, and began
enlisting criminals, those with crushing
debts, and even slaves.
But their situation looked bleak.
After the battle of Cannae, many of the old
Greek cities of southern Italy began to
join Hannibal and rebel against Rome.
Sicily looked like it could break free,
too, and for the next 11 years, war would
rage all over southern Italy.
In the year 211 BC, Hannibal even marched
against Rome itself, causing great panic
in the city,
but like the Greek king Pyrrhus before him,
Hannibal saw no hope of breaching the
city's imposing Servian walls.
The Carthaginian senate made several
attempts to open up a new front in this
war and capitalize on Hannibal's
stunning success. They sent armies into
northern Italy and Sicily, hoping to
regain some of their former territories,
but none of their other generals had the
same ability, and these attempts all
ended in defeat.
Rome now realized that trying to stop
Hannibal was useless,
and the only way they could turn the
tide of this war was to attack Carthage
in return.
They sent one army into Spain, led by a
general named Publius Cornelius Scipio,
who had been among the few survivors of
the battle of Cannae, and he was remarkably
successful.
In the year 209 BC, in a devastating blow,
Scipio managed to capture the Spanish
capital of New Carthage.
Three years later, he defeated the last
remaining Carthaginian army in Spain,
essentially seizing the entire province
and its abundant silver mines for Rome.
Despite everything Hannibal had achieved,
the war was starting to turn in Rome's
favor.
Four years later in 205 BC, with Hannibal
still rampaging in Italy, the Romans gave
Scipio command of the armies of Sicily
and ordered him to set sail for Africa,
to bring this war to the gates of
Carthage itself.
After a year of preparation,
Scipio set sail in 204 BC.
Faced with this invasion that could
behead his entire society, Hannibal was
forced to take his army and leave Italy,
to hurry back to Carthage and defend the
city, as the Roman poet Silius Italicus
renders it.
Carthage, with all her limbs severed, now
depended upon a single man; only the
name of Hannibal prevented her great
realm from sliding into utter ruin.
Envoys promptly set sail, crossing the
sea to recall him, with a plea from his
country warning that should he choose to
linger, the city of Carthage might exist
no more.
Hannibal marshaled all the forces of
Carthage and met Publius Scipio in North
Africa in October of the year 202 BC, at
a place called Zama.
Here, on the eve of battle,
Scipio and Hannibal finally met for the
first time, and Hannibal seems to have
presented a dejected, weary face, as
Polybius writes.
The next day, both commanders advanced
from their camps, attended by a few
horsemen. Presently, they left these
escorts and met in the intervening space
by themselves, each accompanied by an
interpreter. Hannibal was the first to
speak.
After the usual salutation, he said that
he wished that the Romans had never
coveted any possession outside Italy, nor
the Carthaginians outside Libya.
To this battle, Hannibal brought 80
elephants from the stables of Carthage.
But recently, one of Carthage's most
important allies, the kingdom of Numidia
to their west, had seen the writing on
the wall and had switched sides, declaring
for Rome.
For centuries, Numidia had provided
Carthage with its crucial cavalry, and
now Carthage found itself facing these
same Numidian horsemen on the
battlefield.
On top of this, the Romans had developed
new tactics to neutralize Carthage's
great strength, the fearsome war
elephants.
When the battle began, the elephants of
Carthage charged, but the Roman lines
opened up to swallow them, containing
them with spears and pelting them with
javelins. These animals panicked and
stampeded back through the Carthaginian
lines.
In the chaos, the Numidian cavalry, now
fighting with the Romans, swung into the
rear of the Carthaginian ranks, and
Hannibal's army was driven from the
field. He
only narrowly escaped with his life.
after 17 long years of war, Carthage was
once again decisively defeated.
After the years of the destruction that
Hannibal had wrought in Italy, Rome was
in no mood to be lenient.
They forced Carthage to sign an even
more crushing peace treaty than the
first.
All of its overseas territories in Spain
and elsewhere were stripped away from it,
and many of its lands in North Africa
were handed over to the Numidians,
and Carthage was ordered to pay more
than 370 tons of silver, nearly five
times the amount they had paid after the
First Punic War.
The treaty also aimed to destroy
Carthage's ability to wage war in the
future.
It banned them from keeping any war
elephants, all of which were handed over
to the Romans, and restricted the size of
their fleet to only ten ships, barely
enough to even protect them from pirates.
The rest of the Carthaginian navy was
burned in its port.
The Roman poet Silius Italicus describes
the scene.
Then Carthage witnessed a dreadful sight,
her fleet being set ablaze, the waves
aglow with the sudden conflagration,
while Nereus, lord of the ocean, trembled
at the glare.
The Carthaginians were restricted from
declaring war anywhere outside of Africa,
and only in Africa if they got the
permission of Rome first.
The new political situation was clear;
Carthage was now entirely subservient to
Rome.
Hannibal would live for another 20 years
after the battle of Zama, although he
would go into exile in the East, retiring
to Tyre, the mother city of Carthage, and
then to the Selucid Empire and Armenia.
The writer Pausanius claims that he died
when he cut his finger on his drawn
sword and developed septicemia from the
wound.
Other more dramatic stories describe him
taking poison when he finds his dwelling
place surrounded by soldiers loyal to
the Romans, come to capture him and take
him back to Rome in chains.
The Second Punic War was over, and once
more, peace returned to that part of the
Mediterranean that would last for
another 50 years.
During this time, despite its diminished
situation, Carthage continued to flourish.
Ironically, it seemed to do them good to
be freed from the responsibilities of
defending far-flung colonies and
territories that for centuries had
drained their treasury. Nothing about the
war had changed the city's central role
in the network of Mediterranean trade.
Money still flowed into it from all
corners of the sea, so much so that the
Carthaginians offered to pay off the
entirety of the reparations they owed to
Rome just ten years after the end of the
war, when the treaty had given them fifty
years to pay it.
Some of the largest and grandest
buildings in Carthage were constructed
during these decades after the Second
Punic War.
For the people of the city,
it must have been a time of renewed hope,
as the wounds of the long conflict began
to heal.
But their diminished political situation
did have its downsides.
Banned from declaring war without Roman
permission, Carthage repeatedly found
itself defenseless against ambitious
rivals in North Africa,
and one of these was the new Roman ally
and King of Numidia, named Massinissa.
Massinissa was the king who had betrayed
the Carthaginians before the battle of Zama,
sending his powerful Numidian cavalry to
fight for the Romans, and possibly
tipping the entire battle in their favor.
As a result, he had lived a long and
prosperous life.
He was now at the age of 86, and his long
reign had seen Numidia break free of
Carthage and become a North African
power in its own right, and a loyal ally
of Rome.
But Massinissa wasn't content with this,
and he always coveted more land for his
growing kingdom.
With the power of Rome now backing him
and Carthage's hands tied behind its
back, he repeatedly moved to seize
wealthy pieces of land from the weakened
former empire.
The Carthaginians, bound by their treaty,
had to appeal to the Romans to allow
them to defend themselves, but Rome
considered Massinissa a crucial ally, and
they always ruled in his favor.
Carthage was like a great stricken whale
slowly being eaten alive by sharks.
In the year 152 BC, half a century after
the end of the Second Punic War, the
Numidian King Massinissa seized a
particularly rich tract of farmland that
had belonged to Carthage for centuries,
and the Carthaginians were
understandably upset, as the Roman
historian Appian writes.
Not long afterward, Massinissa raised a
dispute about the land known as the ëbig
fieldsí and the country belonging to 50
towns, which is called Tysca. Again, the
Carthaginians had recourse to the Romans.
Again, the latter promised to send envoys
to arbitrate the matter, but they delayed
until it seemed probable that the
Carthaginian interests would be utterly
ruined.
Rome finally agreed to send a delegation
to Carthage to mediate this dispute.
One of the men sent as part of this
delegation was an irascible Roman
senator by the name of Cato the Elder.
Cato at this time was 81 years old, and
had spent much of his time in the
senate railing against what he perceived
as the increasingly loose morals of
Roman society.
As a young man, he had fought against the
armies of Hannibal in Italy, and as a
result, he had grown to utterly detest
the Carthaginians and everything they
stood for.
When he arrived in Carthage, Cato
expected to find the city a barbarian
backwater, impoverished by its two
subsequent defeats at the hands of Rome,
but what he found horrified him.
Carthage was a booming city that seemed
to be doing better than ever, and to his
shock, the visible wealth of the city
seemed to outdo that of Rome itself.
In Plutarch's biography of Cato, he
describes the old senator's reaction.
The city was by no means in a poor or lowly
state as the Romans supposed, but rather
teeming with vigorous fighting men,
overflowing with enormous wealth, filled
with arms of every sort and with
military supplies, and more than a
little emboldened by all this.
The writer Appian records another
version of this moment, as the senators
rode through the wealthy landscape
outside the city.
They carefully observed the country; they
saw how diligently it was cultivated and
what great estates it possessed. They
entered the city and saw how greatly it
had increased in wealth and population
since its overthrow by Scipio not long
before.
When they returned to Rome, they declared
that Carthage was to them an object of
apprehension rather than of jealousy, the
city being so ill-affected, so near to
them, and growing so rapidly.
The old senator Cato was shaken by his
experience.
From then, he would dedicate the final
years of his life to a single cause.
Now at every debate in the senate, Cato
would end every one of his statements,
whether on the price of grain or the
wars in Gaul, whether on the appointment
of new consuls or the response to a
flood in the south, with a single
phrase; ceterum, censeo Carthago delenda est.
Furthermore, I believe Carthage must be
destroyed.
Many in the Roman senate were starting
to agree with him.
Finally, a year after Cato's visit to
Carthage, the Carthaginians had had
enough of the Numidian king Massinissa
taking advantage of their situation.
They sent an army of 50,000 men to seize
back some of the farmland that he had
taken.
But their army was decisively defeated
by the Numidians.
Carthage's last attempt to defend itself
had been a failure, but to the Romans, it
was also a breach of their treaty, and it
was enough of a pretext to go to war one
final time to destroy their old rival
for good.
In the year 149 BC, the old Phoenician
city of Utica seems to have felt the
change in the winds.
They also changed allegiances, declaring
their loyalty to Rome, and in the same
year, a large Roman army used the port of
Utica to land in North Africa, and
prepared to march on the city of
Carthage.
At news of this army landing, the
Carthaginians were distraught.
They sent envoys to meet the Romans, and
when they arrived, the Romans demanded
that the city be completely
demilitarized and hand over all of their
military equipment.
The Carthaginians complied.
They came back with every piece of armor
and weaponry they could find, offering
their total surrender,
and with the Roman general sitting over
them on his high seat, they pleaded with
the Romans not to go to war.
Carthage was now completely disarmed, and
in response, the Romans offered them
peace on one condition, but it was a
condition so absurd that even they must
have known it would be rejected.
They demanded that the Carthaginians
abandoned their city so that it could be
demolished in its entirety and moved 16
kilometers or so inland and away from
the sea.
Appian recounts these Roman demands.
Censorinus rose, and with a stern
countenance, spoke; ëYield Carthage to us,
and betake yourselves where you like
within your own territory, at a distance
of at least ten miles from the sea, for we
are resolved to raze your city to the
ground.í
Such a task would be virtually
impossible, and of course for the
sea-going Phoenicians of Carthage, would
have essentially ended their livelihoods
for good.
Moving the city would have meant
abandoning their temples, the cemeteries
where their ancestors were buried, every
street and corner that they knew.
Appian records the outpouring of grief
as the Carthaginians were informed of
the Roman plans.
While he was yet speaking,
the Carthaginians lifted their hands
toward heaven with loud cries and called
on the gods.
They flung themselves on the ground and
beat it with their hands and heads. Some
of them even tore their clothes and
lacerated their flesh, as though they
were absolutely bereft of their senses.
After the first frenzy was past, there
was great silence and prostration, as of
men lying dead.
So pitiable was this mingling together
of public and private grief that it
drew tears from the Romans themselves.
The Carthaginians withdrew to their city,
and the entire civilian population
prepared to withstand their attackers.
The historian Appian summarizes the dire
situation that the citizens of Carthage
faced.
They reflected that their city was
without arms, that it was empty of
defenders, that it had not a ship, not a
catapult, not a javelin, not a sword, nor a
sufficient number of fighting men.
They had neither mercenaries, nor friends,
nor allies, nor time to procure any. Their
enemies were in possession of their
children, their arms, and their territory.
Their city was besieged by foes provided
with ships, infantry, cavalry, and engines,
while Massinissa, their other enemy, was
on their flank.
But the city was still a formidable
fortress. Its triple line of defensive
walls could withstand any assault,
and it had complex systems for gathering
rainwater and storing it in vast
cisterns, allowing it to maintain a
continuous supply of fresh drinking
water.
The Romans settled in for a siege, but
soon found it to be much more difficult
than they had expected.
They controlled the seas, but swift
Carthaginian sailors were still able to
smuggle food into the city's harbor at
night.
The Romans tried again and again to
storm the city walls, but each time, they
were fought back by the citizens, now
fighting tooth and nail for their
survival with every tool and improvised
weapon they could find, as Appian
recounts.
All the sacred places, the temples and
every other unoccupied space, were turned
into workshops where men and women
worked together day and night without
pause, taking their food by turns on a
fixed schedule. Each day, they made a
hundred shields, 300 swords, a thousand
missiles for catapults, 500 darts and
javelins, and as many catapults as they
could. For strings to bend them, the women
cut off their hair for want of other
fibers.
The siege of Carthage went on for three
years.
In the year 147, command of the besieging
army was given to a new consul, in fact,
the 36-year-old adopted grandson of the
great Publius Scipio, who had beat
Hannibal at the battle of Zama some 50
years earlier, a man named Scipio
Aemilianus.
With him came his personal friend and
official documenter of the expedition,
the Greek historian Polybius, who writes
this part of his history as an
eyewitness.
Infuriated at the smugglers still
supplying the besieged city, the Roman
general Scipio ordered a vast stone
barrier to be built in the mouth of
Carthage's harbor, blocking any further
attempts to resupply it.
Food became scarce in the city,
but still the defenders struggled on.
But in the spring of the year 146 BC, the
spirit of the Carthaginians was
exhausted. Scipio launched a full-scale
assault of the city from the area of the
harbor, and the great walls of Carthage
were finally breached.
The Roman legions poured into the city
and began to massacre every person they
could find.
Appian described the scenes that
followed.
Then came new scenes of horror as the
fire spread and carried everything down.
The soldiers did not wait to destroy the
buildings little by little, but all in a
heap. So, the crashing grew louder and
many corpses fell with the stones into
the midst. Others were seen still living,
especially old men, women, and young
children, who had hidden in the inmost
nooks of the houses, some of them wounded,
some more or less burned, and uttering
piteous cries.
Still others, thrust out and falling from
such a height with the stones, timbers,
and fire, were torn asunder in all shapes
of horror, crushed and mangled. Trenches
were filled with men. The tug of war, the
glory of approaching victory, the rush of
the soldiery, the orders of the officers,
the blast of the trumpets, tribunes and
centurions marching their cohorts hither
and thither --
all together made everybody frantic and
heedless of the spectacles under their
eyes.
The slaughter of Carthage's citizens
went on for six days, during which it's
thought that an estimated 60,000 people
were put to the sword.
The Roman general Scipio set his
soldiers to work in shifts so that they
would not become tired of the killing,
and on the seventh day, Scipio ordered
his soldiers to begin taking prisoners.
From this point, a further 50,000
Carthaginians were rounded up and sold
into slavery.
From there, they would be sold and
dispersed to all corners of the Roman
republic.
Carthage was burned to the ground and
demolished brick by brick.
Some Carthaginians held out for some
time in the citadel of Byrsa, the
fortified hill on which legend has it
that Elishaya once cut apart her ox hide
at the city's founding.
According to Appian, when the
Carthaginian general Hasdrubal finally
surrendered, his wife set fire to the
main temple and climbed upon its roof.
Just like the mythical figure of
Elishaya, she then cast herself and her
children into the flames.
It is said that as the fire was lighted,
the wife of Hasdrubal, in full view of
Scipio, arrayed in the best attire
possible under such circumstances,
and with her children by her side,
said in Scipio's hearing;
ëFor you, Roman, the gods have no cause of
indignation,
since you exercise the right of war.
Upon this, Hasdrubal, betrayer of his
country and her temples, of me and his
children, may the gods of Carthage take
vengeance,
and you be their instrument.í
Having reproached him thus, she slew her
children, flung them into the fire, and
plunged in after them.
Such they say was the death
of the wife of Hasdrubal.
The historian Polybius, who accompanied
Scipio throughout the entire siege,
writes with little detail about what
unfolded, but he does note that in the
moment of his victory, the Roman general
turned to him and said something strange.
In the burning ruins of Carthage, Scipio
Ammianus seems to have felt a spark of
apprehension, a sudden fear or
realization that one day the same fate
might befall his own great city of Rome.
Turning around to me at once and
grasping my hand, Scipio said,
ëA glorious moment, Polybius,
but I have a dread foreboding that
someday the same doom will be pronounced
on my own country.í
It would be difficult to mention an
assurance more statesmanlike and more
profound.
At the moment of our greatest triumph
and of disaster to our enemies -- to bear
in mind at the season of success the
mutability of fortune.
Appian records that Scipio is said to
have wept at the sight of Carthage
burning, and that he recited a line from
Homer's great epic The Iliad, in which
Andromache, the wife of Hector, laments
the coming destruction of Troy.
Scipio, beholding this city, which had
flourished 700 years from its foundation
and had ruled over so many lands, islands,
and seas, rich with arms and fleets,
elephants and money, equal to the
mightiest monarchies but far surpassing
them in bravery and high spirit, now come
to its end in total destruction.
Scipio, beholding this spectacle, is said
to have shed tears and publicly lamented
the fortune of the enemy. After
meditating by himself a long time and
reflecting on the rise and fall of
cities, nations, and empires, as well as of
individuals upon the fate of Troy, that
once proud city, upon that of the
Assyrians, the Medes, and the Persians,
greatest of all, and later the splendid
Macedonian Empire, either voluntarily or
otherwise, the words of the poet escaped
his lips;
ëThe day shall come in which our sacred Troy
and Priam, and the people over whom spear-
-bearing Priam rules, shall perish all.í
But back in Rome, there was no such sense
of foreboding. The city exploded in
celebration at the news.
When the people of Rome
heard of the victory early in the
evening, they poured into the streets and
spent the whole night congratulating and
embracing each other like people just
now delivered from some great fear, just
now confirmed in their worldwide
supremacy, just now assured of the
permanence of their own city, and winners
of such a victory as never before.
They talked about the height of the
walls and the size of the stones.
They pictured to each other the whole
war as though it were just taking place
under their own eyes.
In the days that followed, ash would have
settled over the charred ruins of
Carthage.
From its final victory in the Punic Wars,
Rome would emerge as the only superpower
left in the Mediterranean.
The scattered Greek kingdoms that
remained were one by one absorbed by it,
and in the coming centuries, it would
grow to encompass the entire shore of
that sea, cover all but the farthest
stretches of Western Europe, and shape
the entire course of European history.
But Carthage would become just a name, a
coin that had lost its value, an emblem
of an age that had passed into nothing.
After the carnage of the siege, the
blackened ruins of the city were emptied
of all life.
But for the Romans, this still wasn't
enough.
In the years that followed, they sent
further delegations to the city to
systematically take it apart piece by
piece to ensure that no population crept
back to repopulate its ruins, that never
again would their great rival resurface
in North Africa.
Some of the libraries and archives of
Carthage survived the burning of the
city.
In these were kept the books of
Carthaginian history, perhaps poetry and
mythology, science and medicine, documents
of the Phoenician voyages of discovery
to the edges of the world,
but all of these were taken by the
Romans. Some were simply burned, while
others were distributed among the Romanís
African allies.
As a result, not a single one of these
works has survived.
Today, scarcely a few documents written
by a Carthaginian can be read, and no
works of literature or history have come
down to us.
So, for the next two thousand years,
their story would be told by others.
Their voices and their memory, just like
their city, were completely erased.
The territory of Carthage was absorbed
into the new Roman province of Africa,
and for the next hundred years, what
remained of the ruins of Carthage were
left to crumble into the sands, home to
wild dogs,
overgrown with scrub and weeds and marram
grass, washed with salt from the sea air,
the roost of gulls and crows.
More than a century later,
Rome would send a party of
3,000 colonists to the ruins of the
shattered city, and they founded a Roman
colony on the rubble.
As they settled the area, the ruins of
Carthage were themselves buried beneath
a new Roman town that shared almost
nothing of the city that had once stood
there except its name, and even the ruins
of the city as it had once been would
soon be forgotten.
Around the year 1835, the British
statesman Sir Grenville Temple visited
the ruins of Carthage, and wrote the
following description of his
disappointment upon finding how little
remained of that once great city.
Early on the morning following, I walked
to the site of the great Carthage, of
that town at the sound of whose name
mighty Rome herself had so often
trembled.
I was prepared to see but few vestiges
of its former grandeur,
but my heart sunk within me when
ascending one of its hills, for I beheld
nothing more than a few scattered and
shapeless masses of masonry.
Its very name is now unknown to the
present inhabitants.
Buried in the silence of the grave, no
living soul appearing, except
occasionally a soldier going or
returning from the fort, or the solitary
and motionless figure of an Arab,
watching his flocks from the summit of
the fragment of some former palace or
temple. Solitude and silence hold sway
over the whole scene, a scene which
impresses on the mind a feeling of
melancholy,
which I found difficult to shake off.
Another person who visited these ruins
was the English poet Letitia Elizabeth
Landon, and I'd like to end the episode
with her poem, entitled Carthage.
As you listen, imagine what it would feel
like to watch the streets and temples of
that city crumble and burn, as 800 years
of history is buried beneath ash and
soot.
Imagine every book that has ever been
written in your native language
destroyed, and your people enslaved and
scattered about the face of the Earth.
Imagine what it would feel like to see
your own hometown disappear, emptied of
all life and demolished brick by brick,
then left empty, until only a scattering
of ruins remains.
Low it lieth -- earth to earth --
all to which that earth gave birth --
palace, market street, and fane;
dust that never asks in vain,
hath reclaimíd its own again.
Dust,
the wide worldís king.
Where are now the glorious hours of a
nationís gatheríd powers?
Like the setting of a star in the
fathomless afar,
timeís
eternal wing
hath around those ruins cast the dark
presence of the past.
Thou dost build thy home on sand,
and the palace-girdled strand
fadeth like a dream.
Thy great victories only show
all is nothingness below.
Thank you once again for listening to
the Fall of Civilizations Podcast.
I'd like to thank my voice actors for
this episode; Michael Hajiantonis, Lachlan
Lucas, Alexandra Boulton, Simon Jackson, Tom
Marshall-Lee, Chris Harvey, Nick Denton,
and Paul Casselle.
Sound engineering was by Alexei Sibikin.
I'd like to thank my historical advisor
for this episode, Dr. Michael J. Taylor
from the University of Albany.
Original music was composed and produced
by Pavlos Kapralos, featuring Sass Hoory
on percussion, Anastasia Papadopoulou on
vocals, June Filetti on oboe, and on the
oud and flute, Pavlos Kapralos.
All original tracks composed for this
episode will be available to download
for all Patreon subscribers.
A public list of all sources and
recommended reading for this episode
will also be available on Patreon.
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter, so please come and
tell me what you thought. You can follow
me @PaulMMCooper. If you'd like
updates about the podcast, announcements
about new episodes, as well as images,
maps, and reading suggestions, you can
follow the podcast at Fall_of_Civ_Pod,
with underscores separating the words.
This podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on Patreon. You help me cover my costs
and help me keep the podcast ad-free.
You also let me dedicate more time to
researching, writing, recording, and
editing, to get the episodes out to you
faster, and bring as much life and detail
to them as possible.
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen.
If you enjoyed this episode, please
consider heading onto patreon.com/
fallofcivilizations_podcast,
or just Google Fall
of Civilizations Patreon. That's
P-A-T-R-E-O-N.
For now, all the best, and thanks for
listening.